Just in case there was anyone still out there mistaking me for some sort of domestic diva, or even a moderately skilled at being domestic, you should know that it has taken until the spring of the year 2016, nearly a full decade after starting a food website where I’ve had the brass to coax others along in the kitchen as if I had some sort of innate greater understanding of it, for me to learn how to use my broiler.
Prior to consulting experts reading my oven’s manual um, Googling it a few months ago, I couldn’t for the life of me figure out why other people managed to broil things whenever they needed for as long as they needed but mine shut off after 4 minutes.
It turns out that cracking open the oven door keeps the temperature from getting so high in the oven that it goes into a panic a shuts off, freeing me fulfill my lifelong fantasy of setting all my food on fire.
I’m only a little bit joking.
Last summer, trying to return to a level of normalcy in the weeks after bringing the sweetest potato home from the hospital, Alex and I spent a week Netflix binging on the first season of Chef’s Table and I fell head over heels for cooking I will probably never experience in my life, that from Francis Mallmann.
Mallmann is an Argentine chef whose specialty is wild, open-fire cooking — everything over wood fire, usually in an open pit, on cast iron planchas and parrillas, and sometimes in the ashes too.
And his food looks out of this world — even something as simple as a cheese toast made with a log of goat cheese you can get at your local Stop & Shop is transformed in a griddle over open flames into a crisp, golden-brown crusted melt that I would climb through a television screen to get at.
The episode ended and I declared it time to get a fire pit.
My husband cited fire codes and other pesky side effects of living in the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
I sulked.
But now that I have a functioning broiler — or, to be clear, now I am functioning at using my broiler — and at least the tiniest portion of this desire to cook and eat artfully charred food is sated.
I am also now able, at last, to return to some of the simplest delights of high-heat cooking, in this case, broiled citrus.
We’re at the tail end of peak citrus right now as (hopefully) we’re going to be reacquainted with fresh, local spring produce soon, and I wanted to have one last hurrah with the Moros, the Cara Caras and Minneolas before they’re gone.
Broiling them with a thin schmear of light brown sugar transforms them into something even more special, a fleck of burnt sugar bitterness with the tang of pineapple in the running juices.
Chilling them when you’re done creates a distant relative of a compote that you can use for anything you please over the next week — on pancakes, with yogurt and mint for a luxe breakfast or light dessert, or even with a scoop of vanilla ice cream for an unexpected treat, and I didn’t have to break any laws to pull it off.
Let this be my contribution to the “no recipes” movement, because you are not going to need one here.
What you need is some brown sugar, a few oranges, even imperfect ones, some yogurt and a few leaves of mint.
You do not need measuring spoons.
You will be most successful if you keep an eye on it, as broilers will vary in how fast they get things done.
But, here’s roughly how to do it:
Look, no one is ever going to marry me for my pavlova.
(I mean, talking about dodging a bullet…) This one was particularly underachieving.
First, I thought I’d be clever and try to add the cocoa at the start, mixed with the sugar, so that it would mix the best.
Nope!
It never fully whipped.
With this in the trash, I began my next one, breaking an egg yolk right into the white.
I can usually get it all out (tip!
use the empty shell as a scooper/skimmer) but not this time.
I started a new bowl and, yup, did it again.
Finally, with six uncompromised egg whites and cocoa stirred in only at the very end, ensuring a respectably thick, shiny plume of meringue, I began piling my chocolate plumes on a 9-inch round parchment circle, only to realize this wasn’t very bright, as the meringue would spread.
I cut a new, larger square of parchment and used the old one as a sling/tube-of-a-pastry bag to land the new one in a great, elegant swirl and then fell over laughing (and texting everyone I know with the picture because: all grownup here!) because it looked precisely like everyone’s favorite emoji.
Smoothed into more of a mound, I baked it at the wrong temperature and it got too crispy and riddled with cracks.
Anyone left reading from New Zealand just is doing this right now.
(Don’t worry, I retested it — woe is me — to confirm that the correct temperature and times are indeed correct.)
But I have one thing going for us, and that’s that this pavlova is the most chocolaty I’ve ever had.
The apartment air was steeped with eau de brownies, the very best perfume.
Even a day later, this cake of a meringue is decadent but not heavy, basically dessert magic.
Do not be deceived, as I have been in the past, by the pale beige shade of the outer shell — inside, it’s like a truffle with the impact of and the texture of a pillow.
One of the reasons I think pavlovas can be a hard sell outside, say, the Pavlova Motherlands of Australia and New Zealand, is that I hear from most people that they find them to be too sweet.
But I was able to reduce the sugar a bit from the norm here and didn’t miss it; adding salt also helps as does chocolate, not just because things with chocolate > things without chocolate but because the bitterness of cocoa and chopped chocolate here really kept the sugar in check, as does a plume of barely sweetened whipped cream and a cascade of berries.
Let’s not even pretend that we don’t want to swan dive in.
Given my fixation with both walnuts and everyday cakes, it should come as exactly no surprise that the time between me spying this recipe and me getting it in the oven was about six days.
Which is the equivalent of less than one day in If You Don’t Have An Impish Four-Month Old terms.
I fell for it quickly, it came together even faster (spoiler: the whole thing can be made in a single-bowl food processor) and all of that voluptuous stuff on top — a schmear of jam and a “drift” of whipped cream that’s been tarted up with a little sour cream — are standard no-fuss ingredients.
This cake is an easy win.
And yet, I must fuss.
It is my way.
I am 33 years old, clearly too old and entrenched to change.
I found the jam a little overpowering.
Now, I intentionally went out and sought a jam that would be more tart than sweet, and then I did add the optional lemon juice to further the punch.
Nonetheless, when you have a subtly delightful cake — built on a flavor bed of walnuts toasted nearly to the point of caramelization) — it’s hard to find that under a pile of jam.
I might halve it next time, or just spread a thin slick of it on top.
Or even skip it and for once, listen to my husband who thinks that everything is better with chocolate and perhaps puddle some ganache on top instead.
Or my waistline, that thinks this cake is rich enough plain?
Nah, definitely the husband.
And the whipped-with-a-touch-of-sour cream, lordy, I was excited about that but wow, that sure is a lot of it.
I barely even know who is talking right now, because surely this would never come out of my own mouth but maybe a little less whipped cream next time?
Clearly, I’m feeling under the weather today and it shows.
Beyond my fussing, however, this is one of those cakes that I can imagine as many, many things: I could see it as a birthday layer cake.
Or the kind of breakfast muffins you know are really just small cakes but look, jam!
Clearly that makes them breakfast material.
You could split the cake once or twice and slip the jam between the layers, if you’re feeling fancy.
Pecans would be an obvious substitution, if you don’t like walnuts (but how could you not?).
And I dare say that given the small amount of flour in the cake, it seems ripe for some Kosher for Passover or Gluten-Free adaptability, yes?
Go.
Have fun with it.
This should totally be your Just Because It’s Wednesday Night dessert.
Last November, I finally got my chicken noodle soup exactly the way I always wanted it but when I brought it to the table, I couldn’t eat it.
This happens sometimes.
Sometimes I just spend too much time working on a dish and I’m rather sick of it by the time we eat it, in only the way that a person with first world problems can be.
I chalked it up to that.
I did not chalk it up to the pregnancy I’d found out about approximately 15 minutes prior, because my mother never had morning sickness with either me or my sister, I never had morning sickness with my son, and certainly didn’t think it was going to happen because of a 16 day-old rapidly dividing and already beloved cluster of cells.
The next night, the leftovers, wasn’t much better.
How had I ever liked something so revolting?
“Slippery noodles… soft chickeny bits of celery… sweet supple carrots… everything buttery and swaddling and rich…” I tried to explain to my husband who cracked up at how I could make even the most delicious things sound like a shortcut to the vomitorium.
The problem was, my son went nuts for it.
Every day he came home from school and hopefully asked “Are we having chicken noodle soup for dinner?” and every day, was crushed to hear the word no.
My husband finally took pity on him a couple weeks later and made it from my recipe.
I hid in the bedroom until the smell was gone.
And so it went for the next 38 dreary weeks.
Food was uninteresting or downright terrible.
I was gloomy because I never realized how much my motivation here is driven by hunger and a now-elusive appetite.
I wondered if it would always be this way.
The day we took Anna home from the hospital, my mother-in-law insisted upon heating up the soup she’d brought over for my lunch and I was two spoonfuls into it when I realized: I was eating the enemy.
Happily.
“How did I ever hate this?
This is amazing: I love the noodles!
The chicken!
The carrots!” I wanted to inhale the whole bowl.
I wanted seconds.
Fourths.
I wanted sweet potatoes and winter squash and omelets and caramelized onions and every single thing that I’d ever found disgusting and it’s been that way since.
I’m cured!
Not to overstate it, but I feel totally alive again.
And so it should be no surprise that I couldn’t stay out of the kitchen long.
I would not say that my first attempt back at the stove was a resounding success.
In the weeks before my daughter (still getting used to saying this!) was born, I began compiling at a list of Quick Recipes for Sleepy Times, things that seemed too simple not to try if I could steal 15 minutes downtime and was eager to do anything, albeit briefly, besides parenting.
This was at the top of it.
I prayed I’d never be too tired or crazed to slice tomatoes on bread, as if I didn’t know that’s exactly what the early weeks are like.
The idea behind this is to take the perfect high summer classic — a tomato sandwich on hearty bread with mayo, salt and pepper — and add one glorious extra thing, a slice of provolone cheese, fried.
So it forms a brown crust, like frico but with a melty center.
I was excited about this because while better frying cheeses exist — halloumi is at the top of the list, but I tend not to focus on it much here because it’s both elusive (even in NYC, I only find it about half the time I’m looking for it) and expensive (I’ve never bought a block for less than $10, and could easily demolish it myself in one meal… but try not to) — if there was a way to have a similar effect with a generally overlooked inexpensive deli aisle staple, I’d never turn it down.
Jennifer Hess, a longtime food blogger whose ideas always make me want to stop what I’m doing to run to the kitchen, warns on Food52 to that frying the cheese would be “tricky and messy, and you’ll probably curse my name, but it can be done…” and, lo, I did it but without any particular grace or skill.
I’ll chalk it up to 18 days of sporadic sleep.
Regardless, I want/need you to know that even with the scraped-up brown mess masquerading as fried provolone I flopped onto our sandwiches, it still 18 ways amazing, the absolutely most wonderful summer lunch there could be.
We inhaled it.
I wanted to make it again the next day, alas, “the new day” in new parent-ese is roughly 3 to 4 weeks.
Regardless, it’s totally going to taste like triumph.
I hope you get a chance to try it, much sooner.
Thank you: For your good cheer on our announcement.
You make it really fun to share great news here.
I’m a little behind on well, everything, but also comment responses, although I read every single one twice.
I expect to be all caught up by the time she graduates high school.
:)
New York City is a terrible place to summer.
Whereas some water-bound towns have cool breezes rolling in off the ocean all day, we can better rely on the hot exhale of garbage trucks.
Offices are set to roughly the same temperature as a polar ice cap, but subway platforms are so unfathomably sweltering that on my first day in NYC 14 years ago, I — adorably, like the wee baby New Yorker I was — uttered the words, “Is this even legal?” It’s a rare day that you don’t walk down the sidewalk and have a window a/c unit drip you-don’t-want-to-know run-off on your head.
Flip-flops may cool your feet outside, but you may never recover from seeing the new color of your toes at the end of a day, and it always seems like everyone but me has Summer Fridays.
The city tries, it really does, to make things more livable: the 14 beaches are free, there are dozens and dozens of free public pools, something like a zillion sprinkler parks, and you know all those endless photos you see of children frolicking in spraying fire hydrants?
Hardly a symbol urban decay, it’s actually legal and encouraged.
But the fact is that from July 4th on (and possibly earlier this year), anyone that has the means to be elsewhere is, and the rest of us plebes schvitz it out on the pavement.
And this summer, we’re going to do it grandly.
We are going to embrace the heat.
We are going to pretend we are someplace tropical and glamorous.
Our summer house awaits… uh, in the blender.
My editor went to Colombia in March and came back ecstatic that she’d found the MOST DELICIOUS BEVERAGE EVER (all caps, even, from an editor so you know it was major), limonada de coco, which is essentially coconut milk, lime juice, sugar and ice ground together into what I’d probably call coconut limeade slushie but sounds, like most things, much more glamorous in Spanish.
And yes, you can put rum in it too.
But we did not.
My son decided one hour into yesterday’s 90 degree morning yesterday that he’d had eee-nufff of the heat and of having an Ace bandage on his sprained ankle and no, he would not, could not, stop yelling.
I hear you, kid, I really do.
And so we decided that only a South American brain freeze would make things better and look, I don’t mean to oversell them, I don’t, but you must believe me when I tell you: this drink solves everything.
It will make the stickiest weather seem bearable, it will make you feel like you’re on vacation when you’re not, and it will make you wish sandal season were longer, if only it meant you could have one of these a day.
One of the things I obsessively collect in my cooking life — aside, apparently, from container lids with no bases and jars of mustard seeds because every time a recipe requires it I presume I’m out because of that one time in 2010 I was — is recipes with very short ingredient lists.
It’s not revolutionary to learn that, say, a salad can be made with just lettuce, oil, and vinegar or to find tomato bread, or basil pesto on these lists, but Marcella Hazan’s 3-ingredient tomato sauce is indeed something pretty revelatory, especially when you’re short on time to go to the store or merely patience to cook.
So is this Minimalist Barbecue Sauce, Bacon Corn Hash, this summer squash pizza topping that could convert anyone to zucchini, and if does not, this Quick Zucchini Sauté will, the omelet that’s basically Spain’s national dish (and mine), and let us never forget all of the magical things that happen when you let fresh raspberries, brown sugar, and sour cream blister under a broiler, or roast a sweet potato until it almost candies itself inside.
It’s not fully populated (I keep finding things I’ve missed and taking liberties when the 6th ingredient is butter or olive oil) but I finally got to pulling together a few of my favorites in this collection this summer.
Life is busy; it’s here to help.
Despite all of this, I am a deeply contradictory person.
While I assure you that these recipes don’t require any more ingredients than listed to fulfill their delicious destinies, if you were to try to tell me about a recipe with a set number of ingredients, I’d immediately bristle at the limitation.
“What was the 6th one?
Maybe I have it!
I really don’t mind taking it out!” 
Regardless, today’s recipe is a long-overdue entry into the high reward for low ingredient count category.
Stateside, confusingly, flapjacks mean pancakes but in UK, flapjacks are something completely different, a tray-baked, soft-centered, chewy, crunchy-edged caramel-scented bar made only with oats, golden syrup, brown sugar, and butter*.
If they are not already, we need these in our lives.
They’re considered the quintessential teatime treat; alas, I don’t have a whole lot of teatime in my life but I do have hangry schoolkids that require nut-free snacks and that these are also gluten-free and ridiculously quick to make (you’ll memorize the recipe after the first time you make them) means that they’ve been on repeat here since the school year began.
“But Deb, flapjacks have only 4 ingredients.
What’s the 5th?
I might have it!” 
Fair enough.
I added chocolate.
Does it *need* chocolate?
For once, I’m totally torn; they’re outstanding either way.
* Although if Queen Mary Berry said marg-reen was okay in 1974, who am I to argue?
Alex’s birthday was Friday, and if there is one thing I think we all know by now about my sous-chef, assistant photographer, sometimes (coughoften) dishwasher and starry-eyed compatriot is that he is the true chocoholic in this family.
There is rarely a dish, from strawberry tarts to banana bread, raspberry-filled sandwich cookies to bretzel rolls that he does not insist could be improved by the addition of chocolate.
Or cheesecake.
Or brownies.
But mostly chocolate.
Thus, when Rebecca at Eat wrote a few weeks ago about making a–you might want to sit down for this one–Brownie Mosaic Cheesecake for a neighbor’s birthday, I sent Alex the link and he immediately wrote back: That’s the one.
You see Alex, too, has a Very Difficult Life.
Every year, he is forced to pick ONE recipe from my past or future repertoire, for his birthday cake, and this Sophie’s Choice of the decadent world leaves him paralyzed with indecision for months before.
(I’m probably flattering myself but, um, as the word-ist in this relationship, it’s just one of my perks.*) The chocolate caramel cheesecake of his last two birthdays?
His beloved icebox cake?
Chocolate Guinness cake?
The cake I made for his mother’s birthday?
Or something new, like the 8-layer cake with crushed peanut butter cups between each from this month’s Saveur, adapted without (ahem) cake mix?
How about a nutella/espresso ice cream cake?
(Shoot, I didn’t mention this option and now he will kick himself.)
But when he saw Rebecca’s recipe he was sold, and so was I, but in my case mostly on finding ways to make it as easy as possible.
(I mean, obviously I do not love him at all if I was unwilling to martyr myself over a 12-hour period for a single cake that would be eradicated quickly by punch-drunk peers.) That said, Rebecca had made clear which parts of the cake she felt worked and which did, which was very helpful as I tried to figure out ways to adapt it for simplicity.
When she mentioned having a difficulty with the crumb crust, I remember the chocolate crumb crust I have used several times now and now I’m going to let you in on a little secret and after this, we’re not going to talk about it again, okay?
Psst: Chocolate Teddy Grahams.
I know, it’s just so unnatural.
The first time I grabbed these (on Alex’s suggestion, natch) because I couldn’t find the classic Nabisco Chocolate Wafers most recipes suggest.
Then, when I was able to find the wafers again, I realized that the Teddy Grahams tasted better.
I know it sounds ludicrous, but they do, by miles, in crust form at least.
So does doubling the crust, something I cannot resist doing.
I never argue with a high crust-to-cheesecake ratio.
Rebecca had also mentioned that she felt there were better brownie recipes out there for the chocolate chunks, such as the Cook’s Illustrated classic.
And this is where the corner-cutting comes in, because although I, too, have weighed the Cook’s Illustrated recipe against my own go-to variety, the Baker’s One Bowl Brownie, for the sake of speed and the fact that the flavor would be buried and burrowed within a cheesecake, the One Bowl was definitely the way to go.
Did I mention that they are still delicious, delicious brownies?
They really are.
If you’re ever in a hurry, don’t underestimate their knee-weakening chocolate assault.
Finally, the cheesecake.
Although there was not a single thing wrong with the recipe’s original cheesecake, I’ve had my eye on the Epicurious cheesecake recipe from the Three Cities of Spain Coffeehouse for a long time.
Why?
Because it has 76 glowing reviews, a 99% success rate and, most saliently, four ingredients.
And when you are making a crust, brownies, cheesecake and ganache, a one-bowl, four-ingredient cheesecake will be your best friend.
And don’t forge the ganache.
Well, technically, you could, it’s not that anyone would ever take a bit of that cheesecake and think it was plain or repressed.
But, if you’re me, and you’re too lazy to make a water bath for your cheesecake thus they always have Buffy the Vampire Slayer-like markings across the top, ganache makes some excellent touch-up.
So, how did it go?
By the mouths of 17 people, including one who is lactose-intolerant, one who is always dieting, and one who doesn’t even like sweets, it was gone in five minutes flat.
I couldn’t be more proud.
And Alex couldn’t have found more over-the-top decadent chocolate cheesecake bliss.
But, it won’t keep us from searching, as there always is next year to think of.
Alex’s hot, young wife (*ibid) bought him a new camera toy for his birthday, a flash that actually adjusts itself not to blow an aggressive white light in the faces of peers!
He and his new toy are already deeply in love, and although I have not yet figured out if it will get along with food pictures, it’s already vastly improved the quality of other indoor shots.
Come see for yourself!
Guess what?
We’re at T-Minus-5-Days until we depart for the Napa Grilling weekend that you sent us on.
(Thank you, thank you, thank you!) Please, if you’ve been to Napa or live near there, tell us where to go.
We’ve got one afternoon and three evenings to fill with activity, and are absolutely overwhelmed by our options.
Fried rice is a triumph of resourcefulness.
It’s budget-friendly, all leftovers are welcome, and there’s no strict formula or ingredient list, just stir-frying cooked rice with whatever you have around — eggs, scraps of vegetables, seafood, or meat — and seasoning the lot of it with soy sauce and garlic.
This single-skillet/wok dinner is ready to be torn into in 10 minutes.
Hailing from East, Southeast and South Asian cuisine, it has absolutely nothing to do with the vague Italian/Mediterranean terroir of these ingredients, but I have for almost as many years as I’ve made Zucchini, Tomato and Rice Gratin (from a 2008 Gourmet Magazine, so: many) wished it could be a kind of wildly inauthentic Italian fried rice too.
The original dish is a bit bit fussy as written — two baking sheets, one pot in which to cook the rice, saute pan for the onions and more, followed by a baking dish for the assembled gratin —  and while the rewards for this effort are great, the level of effort ensures I make it approximately once every two years, a shame when all of the ingredients are so readily available in August.
This is the weeknight fix version.
There are two general approaches to fried rice, one in which the ingredients are cooked separately to help them maintain their distinct flavors and to ensure each reach the ideal color/texture before assembling in the final stage and the quicker way, each into one pan in a layered manner.
I made this both ways.
The first, with each ingredient cooked to a brown-edged blister, was unbelievably good… and, quite hideous.
Were this a photo-less food blog, it wouldn’t be a thing, but alas, it was.
I then made it the quicker way and it’s, perhaps, one degree less hard on the eyes but definitely less complex in flavor.
But both were devoured, a filling, delicious bowl of summer comfort food that I expect to be a new staple.
I think we all need this for dinner tonight.
It’s Father’s Day around these here parts which is supposed to mean one thing, really (you know, aside from hanging out with the dads, and papas-to-be in your life): backyard grilling.
Alas, New York City has moved to Seattle this June, and we’ve spent more time umbrella bumping on sidewalks and avoiding street juice puddles than actually being beckoned to suburban backyards for some sun and chaise lounge napping but don’t worry, I still made you some potato salad.
You know, in case the weather decides to get out of its funk for an hour or two.
I’ve been mumbling about making a horseradish potato salad for a few weeks now, threatening I guess is more like it, because I know horseradish is another of those Great Divider ingredients.
Many find it spicy, and well, many varieties are, but the vast majority of the jars that I grab in the grocery store aisle are about as ferocious as a kitten.
What I was really after was that cool but heady sinus-clearing aroma, which I imagined that paired with creamy dressing and some fresh dill and chives would be a most welcome accent to whatever we throw on the grill.
(Oh please please let it be Molly’s ribs!) And while we’ve only had the smallest of samples (see how giving I am?), this Russian I live with gives it his hearty seal of approval, and looks forward to next Father’s Day, when he won’t be stuck washing up the dishes when he’s done.
Make your own horseradish sauce: As you can see, I used a prepared one, as much because I was being lazy as because I wanted this recipe to work with grocery store ingredients I know most people will pick up.
But if you’re feeling more ambitious, homemade horseradish sauce is not hard to make, and shee-zow, it really knows how to wake a party up.
This link will get you started.
I’m sorry, I know I have a broccoli rubble problem.
But you see, broccoli rubble in itself was a solution to another problem and perhaps we’ve created a monster, but it’s a delicious monster.
We are going to keep it.
Let me rewind and explain.
Problem: Two children (not the aforementioned monsters, or at least not yet today)  who do eat different vegetables at different times but really only reliably both eat broccoli each time.
Plus two parents who are growing bored with eating steamed (because they haven’t yet seen the light of crispy roasted broccoli, although they are wrong and we tell them this often) broccoli all the time.
Solution: Give it a fine chop (rubble it, if you will) and sauté it in olive oil with a heap of garlic, as many red pepper flakes as we can get away with, lemon zest, salt, and black pepper and then finish it with fresh lemon juice and a fistful of grated pecorino romano (particularly excellent here for its pungent saltiness) for a mixture that’s zinging with enough flavor you’d eat it from a fork with nothing else.
But it’s so good, we prefer to stretch it into dinner as often as possible.
We’ve finished it with these pangrattato crumbs and a crispy egg, or when at room temperature, a ball of burrata.
(Which is becoming the new #putaneggonit, at least when we find it for a reasonable price.) We’ve tucked it between a piece of toast and slice of provolone for broccoli melts.
We’ve put it on top of a slick of garlicky béchamel with torn mozzarella on top for broccoli pizzas.
And now there’s this: a farro salad that’s as good warm as it is at room temperature, which means it can be ready for all the weekend picnics and potlucks to come, or for dinner any night of the week.
Such as this one.
In times of lots of worry and little sleep, like most of us, I return to my comforts and staples: avocado toast, a great pot of meatballs, and as many ways as I can find to intersect noodles and eggs.
While I am fairly certain I could live off this fiery, crunchy spaghetti pangrattato with crispy eggs for the rest of my life, as bits of spring have been in the air, I am always ready for fresh takes on cold noodles.
Flipping through Heidi Swanson’s wonderful Near & Far a few weeks ago, I became entranced with the cold soba salad in part for the ingredients but really it was the footnote at the end that stayed with me: “Serve topped with a poached egg or an omelet sliced into a whispery-thin chiffonade.” Whispery-thin chiffonade.
Could anything be so lovely?
I imagined the strands of eggs tangling with the strands of noodles, punctuated with a sesame-seed flecked sauce and crispy raw vegetables and I needed it in my life.
And then, as these things happen, a few days later I was clicking aimlessly around the web while I should have been, I don’t know, writing a cookbook or responding to email and fell down a summer ramen rabbit hole.
Sure, we’re all about the ramen everywhere these days, but as the weather warms up in Japan ramen shops add a chilled ramen [Hiyashi Chuka Soba] to their menu, usually topped with, among other things, those ribboned eggs that charmed me.
The dressing uses ground sesame seeds, sesame seed paste, vinegar and sesame oil, which you know means it will be amazing and the options for etceteras are as long as your imagination (or as deep as the odd-ends of your vegetable drawer go, though imitation crab, cucumbers and tomatoes are the most common).
That said, dishes like this can get complicated quickly and we’re firing on fewer cylinders these days, so I attempted to hone in as much as possible on the eggs and the noodles.
When it’s actually summer here, I’ll probably pile on more seasonal vegetables.
A few times a year, I go on a Dinner Intervention, which might sound a little more gentle than it is.
It sounds like a “Honey, I was thinking I’ll do something different with dinner this week” but in reality it is more of a “Gah, I am so sick of take-out and fobbed together meals!
I’ve had enough!” wherein I throw down the proverbial spatula and demand we do better.
Dinner is not my strong suit; I love side dishes and “tapas-style” meals (a joke consisting of bits and pieces of leftovers from the fridge meals.)  I’ve got pancakes, slaws and potatoes down pat, but when it comes down to what I consider the Holy Grail of home cooking — Getting Dinner On The Table with any regularity — I fall woefully short.
Seeing as we can get great salads, hummus platters and cracker-thin pizzas delivered in no time, why would I want to bother cranking up the broiler?
Fortunately, I do, that is, want to bother, due to a confluence of events.
First, the markets are finally brimming with local spring produce that I’m hauling home by the armload.
Nothing I can order for dinner tastes or looks half as good.
And second, we’re on the verge of reaching the age where we’ve got a little person at the table with us, a little person who I will not be feeding bits of takeout Pad Thai for dinner.
So it’s time to get our dinner act together, once and for all.
I’m starting with my favorite trick for those at a dinner impasse: throw an egg on it.
For now, it’s the answer to almost all of my dinner woes.
“I made a batch of creamed chard and spring onions, now what?” Or earlier this week: “I’ve got a beautiful bundle of ramps languishing in the fridge, how can I make this dinner?”* In almost every case, some toasted hearty bread plus a fried egg made these things a meal.
Spicy tomato stew becomes shakshuka; warm mushroom salad becomes an entree, ginger fried rice becomes a meal you still dream about, months later, and punchy, bright potatoes are given excuse to shine as a main course.
And last night, with an attempt at a lighter approach to hash — yes, like hash browns or corned beef hash, but with crunchy New Jersey asparagus — we didn’t even need the hunk of bread to yield a satisfying late dinner.
I’ve been thinking about ways to reinvent hash since I tried a tasty but heavy riff on it with shredded short ribs this past winter.
With spring here (or summer, really, with the hellacious upper-80s scattered storms humidity we’ve had this week) few things are more welcome than a single-pan meal that allows me to whittle away at my farmers market haul without cranking up the oven.
* Thinly slice cleaned ramps, keeping the bulbs and greens separate.
Sauté the bulbs in butter and/or oil until softly caramelized, about 5 to 10 minutes, then add the greens and cook for 5 minutes more.
Season with salt and pepper.
Spread it on a piece of toast.
If you’ve got Canadian bacon around, crisp up a thin slice and put that on the toast first, before the ramps.
If you’ve got grated gruyère or goat cheese, use that too.
Fry an egg and le voila!
The most delicious open-faced breakfast dinner sandwich, yet.
Do try this!
Seeing as I’ve already admitted that I’m kind of a terrible host, I might as well let the confessional continue and tell you that I’m a terrible traveler.
Oh, I don’t mean that I kvetch and whine the whole time (though you might want to ask Alex if he agrees, now that we’ve taken six flights and visited five cities in eight days together!), I just mean that I never do any of those really great things those really smart people writing really quite logical articles suggest, like keeping the amount of stuff you bring down so that it will fit in one of those bitty suitcases you can stuff into overhead.
I don’t roll my clothing to prevent wrinkles or have my most important items in my carry-on so I won’t be at a loss if my luggage is.
I never have one of those scarfy/pashmina things to use as a blanket/pillow/tent of warmth on the plane or train, nor do I remember Vitamin C, hand sanitizer, eye masks, earplugs or to eschew caffeine for purer forms of hydration, like water, and I never, ever remember to pack a wholesome homemade snack.
However, if you are one of the people that fits the description above, I would immensely love to travel with you.
May I interest you in a book tour?
If I were, however, I’d bring these.
I wasn’t actually trying to make these when I did.
I was trying to make a fall crepe.
But, I decided that pumpkin crepes were kind of boring, and when trying to figure out something to gussy them up with (maple yogurt?
something crunchy?) I realized that a nut would be wonderful.
But then I started kicking around ideas like maple-butter walnuts and spicy-sweet-pecans I decided it was rather lame that most spiced nuts are full of butter, sugar and bacon and this was breakfast, surely they could be a tiny bit indulgent but also wholesome.
And then I made these and I entirely forgot about the pumpkin crepes.
(Really.
We had the delight of evacuating them from our fridge after a few days of a power outage and trust me, you wouldn’t be hungry for pumpkin crepes after that either!) 
Here’s why they rule: there’s no added butter or oil or fat aside from that which is already in the nut itself.
Its crusted with just a tiny bit of sugar, but a lot of oats, coconut, seeds and pretty much anything else wholesome you like to mix into your granola.
They’re spectacularly easy to make and they work as well as a snack as they do mixed into yogurt (imagine having a bag of these in your suitcase when you travelled!
And you could have them with your yogurt every morning!
Man, I wish I knew people who thought of things like this.) They’d also be a great housewarming/hostess/holiday gift as they keep really well but the best part about them is that every single one of them is like the very best part of granola: the giant clusters.
The ones you fish out.
Don’t even try to pretend otherwise.
I know what you’re thinking; you don’t even need to say it: It’s time for a fritter intervention.
A frittervention?
Here, I’ll go first: My name is Deb Perelman and I have a fritter problem.
And I really do.
I pretty much want to fritter all the things, all the time — broccoli, zucchini, apples, parsnips, an Indian medley, leeks (here), and potatoes, potatoes, potatoes,  I actually have to hold myself back, and try to evenly space my fritter episodes throughout the year, so not to pique your concern about my fritter consumption.
It’s not easy because no matter how many times I talk it out in a circle of understanding peers, I fear I will still think that fritters are the answer to most food dilemmas, most of the time.
They’re the ideal toddler vegetable delivery method.
Aside a bowl of lightly dressed mixed greens for the lunch I’m supposed to be having (not, cough, leftover pizza), a couple fritters make it all worthwhile.
Alone on a plate, dolloped with a creamy yogurt sauce, they’re a happy afternoon snack.
And formed intentionally tiny, they belong at a cocktail party.
As do you.
In my defense, I hadn’t frittered in nearly six months before I slipped.
The last time, it was broccoli and it was angled specifically towards the toddler set.
There was parmesan and only a tiny, non-threatening amount of garlic.
The goal was not to ruffle any overtaxed young mealtime feathers.
So, of course, you know what happened: my sample population, my toddler, refused to eat them.
In response, these fritters don’t care.
(Sorry, kid.) There’s more garlic, lemon zest, salty, crumbly feta cheese and they’re flecked with kicky Aleppo pepper.
That’s a smoky cumin yogurt on top.
They’re dotted with tart pomegranate seeds.
Once again, you probably already know what happened: “More please!”
Nevertheless, they want to go to a party with you and I think you should let them.
In a December that is to the gills with buttery cookies, decadent cheese plates, stiff drinks and rich roasts, they might even be a little island of moderation, as decked out with tiny red bulbs as the nearest windowsill.
What’s on your list?
You know, the running one you keep in your head, in a series of Post-It notes spread across all surfaces of your life, or if you are particularly scary kooky, on a spreadsheet?
Me, I’ve got several lists.
There’s the Apartment Want This list, because, oh, how I covet the home furnishings; the Go Here list, which holds my in- and outside NYC destination dreams; the Read This list, which I pretty much avoid, and the Listen to This list with all of the music I would like to download and shake my booty arrhythmically to were I not fascistly opposed to DRM.
Then there is the Cook This list, all 300+ items long.
This one neither makes me feel bad about my financial limitations (like the Apartment list), vacation time availability (like the Go Here list), my Web-ruined attention span when it comes to content running more than 500 words (like the Read This list), or what happens when you let a bunch of people in board rooms decide how music should be sold (like the Listen list).
Sure, I don’t have time to get to all of the items on the Cook This list, but that’s not the point.
Thus, let me humbly suggest that you add a Leek Swiss Chard Tart to your list or lists, in whatever format they may be.
I had bookmarked this for more months than I care to dwell on, and then made it two days before we had a chance to eat it and still, it has absolutely saved us at dinnertime twice this week.
To me, a quiche and a few salad greens, perhaps a bit of something pickled and, oh, why not, a decadent slice of cheese in the fridge is all I could ever need or want to subsist on.
It is both Brunch and Dinner.
It tastes as good the third day as it did the first.
It is one less thing on a list, and this alone is something to celebrate.
I am never a better citizen of the sidewalks of New York than I am when I have a newborn, or at least the variety we’ve been assigned twice now: those that can only be calmed by long walks in the stroller.
And so we stroll, even though it’s unforgivably hot out, even though we rarely get out of the apartment early enough to enjoy those brief parts of the day when there’s an actual shady side of the street to hover on, even though we really don’t need anything else from the Greenmarket or anywhere else, we make up excuses so we have somewhere to go.
On the best of days, we see people that we know and the neighborhood feels like something out of Mr.
Rogers (although his is notably absent of the guy who yells outside my apartment all day about his superstitions and the clouds of secondhand decriminalized smoke we wade through).
We bumped into my son’s old preschool teacher a few weeks ago, someone who likes to cook almost as much as me, and she said she’d recently made a big batch of caponata and had been having it with everything — for breakfast with an egg, in sandwiches for lunch and even with pasta for dinner and I thought that sounded absolutely brilliant.
I just needed to learn how to make caponata.
I read a lot and I learned several things about this eggplant dish.
First, definitely don’t try to exhaust yourself by finding a one/true/authentic version.
Just about all are authentic and true and few match, because everyone makes it the best way they know how and that’s usually the way their grandmothers made it and you have to be out of your mind if think I’m going to argue with a Sicilian grandmother.
However, I knew a few things: I knew that while I am completely okay with frying eggplant the authentic way that it’s totally cool if you’d like to just roast or sauté it.
I wanted to stick to a core list of ingredients — eggplant, onion, celery, tomato, capers, olives, raisins, basil and pine nuts — because while you can add a whole lot of things — i.e.
garlic, zucchini, sweet or hot peppers, anchovies — I had a hunch there’s enough going on in the flavor department with the core list that it wouldn’t need much more to taste good.
Finally, I wanted it to be truly and completely tangy.
A good caponata is like a sweet and sour eggplant jam, or even a pickled Mediterranean compote, with both crunch and softness.
The disappointing ones have an oily mouthfeel and no bright, dynamic flavor to back them up.
When you have a good one, you’ll want to immediately dollop it on toast, or as we’re currently hooked on doing, nestling it against a thick slice of good, soft mozzarella on a slice of wholegrain bread.
I wish all of my aimless wandering led to meals this good.
Does anyone really need a recipe for garlic bread?
I mean, garlic + butter + bread = it’s impossible to imagine a bad outcome.
And yet I do use one.
I mean, prior to today it was in my head and did not include baguette weights because despite the impression this site might give you, I’m not that crazy upstairs.
I use a recipe because like most people in the year 2016, I don’t take carb consumption lightly, and garlic bread is even more of a rare luxury.
Because of this, if I’m going to make it I don’t want it to be almost right but could use a little more salt, or too much garlic and too little butter, and absolutely not pale and soggy or crouton-hard.
I want each time I make it to be like the best time I ever had it, a beacon of bronzed edges, lightly drenched with garlic butter with a whiff of herbs and a kiss of salty heat.
I want this.
I want you to have it too.
… with a great big pot of easy meatballs, with a pile of crispy zucchini chips and a dollop of marinara, with a perfect green salad, so earnest, you might even earn seconds of bread or with a humble bowl of broth with beans and greens, for balance.
This, this mash-, roast-, horseradish-, bangers-, crisps-, and goose fat-free, is one of my favorite things I ate while I was in the UK, and it’s not even British.
Technically speaking, it was from a Venetian small plates restaurant, although I came to associate meals with generous helpings of gorgeously cooked spinach with the UK, as it appeared, to my delight, on so many plates.
I had spinach tangled with a duck breast at a gastropub in what felt like the middle of nowhere, spinach in small tufts on another pizza (this one alongside a perfect pint) my first jet-lagged night in town, and a perfect amount of spinach at a pub on a Sunday afternoon, kissed with the horseradish sauce that had been ladled, to my glee, over my roast, but this was my favorite.
Here, spinach that has been wilted and squeezed, is re-plumped, so to speak, with creme fraiche, parmesan, salt and pepper, and is generously spread over a tiny pizza.
An egg centers on this pile (and sometimes around it, at least in my kitchen) and the whole mess is baked together until the edges of the pizzette are brown, the spinach is tender, with a slight gratin-like effect, and the egg is white at the edges and just-runny-enough in the center and I think it might be my perfect meal.
I would have it for breakfast, lunch, or dinner almost any day of the week (also in the rain, on a train, on a boat, with a shark…) and now that I’ve discovered that glorious late-season spinach still exists at markets around here, I might just make it happen.
The restaurant, by the way, is called Polpo and they have one of the most gorgeous cookbooks I’ve ever seen, with a raw binding almost haphazardly stitched with thin red thread.
What’s between the covers seemed so simple to me that the first few times I saw it (on book tours, needless to say, you spend a lot of time in bookstores) I dismissed it, thinking it had nothing to teach me.
Silly Deb.
It took only one visit to the Soho location, one tiny crisp, cold runner bean salad with walnuts and pesto, to remember that some of the best meals in the world are deceptively simple with suspiciously short ingredient lists.
Within these confines, great cooking shines.
Several years ago, my job required that I occasionally fly here and there for conferences and, oh, they were not fun.
I know that many conferences today are wonderful events where wonderful people meet and expand their professional horizons but those for me were all about windowless conference rooms, buzzing fluorescent lights, and all hopes that I would be able to “get out!” and “see a new city!” dashed when I realized I would, in fact, need to file articles from my hotel room that night.
On the lowest of these trips, I found myself gazing at a painfully unappetizing room service menu and came across an item called a “fried cheese collage” and this, I am sad to say, was the last straw.
“What is WRONG with this world?” I grumpily, nay, hangrily told my husband over the phone.
“Fried cheese?
Why does cheese need to be breaded and fried?
Isn’t cheese lovely without breading?
Without frying?” 
Well, it turns out, I do.
I need to fry cheese.
Flash forward many years and a more charmed career later, and I was invited a couple weekends ago to a brunch gathering of well-dressed people with websites (okay, that wasn’t the focus, just something I noted; related: I have no idea why they let me in) and well, I actually had to leave really early because we had other plans for the day but I did get to sit down for the salad course.
Plates of salad were passed around, each topped with what I assumed was a seared scallop but turned out to be so, so much better.
It was, in fact, a Panko-crusted round of goat cheese that had been fried to a crisp edge and melted, oozy center.
Fried cheese.
Fried.
Cheese.
Yes.
I had to make it, as soon as humanly possible and when I went on my fridge-cleaning bender before our current vacation and found a dated log of goat cheese and, well, not a whole lot else in the fridge to use up, I found my chance.
But that’s the brilliance of this crouton.
You could take anything you had around  — aging salad greens, some languishing rings of pickled shallot from a different recipe and the saddest hyperbright cherry tomatoes you ever did see — and with the addition of this golden, crunchy, warm topping, turn it into salad nirvana.
If you’ll allow me to digress further, let me tell you why I think this is so important.
I don’t think you need anyone’s help making peak-season, farm-fresh produce, gleaming with dewy, organic newness taste good.
It just does.
Shaved thinly or chopped roasted whole with a drizzle of olive oil, a squeeze of lemon and a showering of coarse sea salt later, dinner is served, and heavenly so.
But where I live, most of the months of the year are not, in fact, the growing season.
By January, it’s mostly bagged lettuce mixes and when, in April, my longing for a tomato is so intense that I’m willing to wing it with those aforementioned cherry hyperbrights, and these, my friends, take some good cooking, some good recipes, to make sing.
A little melty crouton magic could be just that thing, the trick you keep in your back pocket to zip out for a Mother’s Day brunch, dinner party or a better-than-expected lunch when the thought of another sad little off-season, flavorless salad is too much to bear.
Like most people with at least a passing interest in foods made from recognizable ingredients, I’ve heard a lot about almond milk in the last decade.
But my love of all things milk, cream, crème fraîche, sour cream, double-cream, triple-creme, dulce de leche, sweetened condensed milk and milk fudge (you know, just to get started) was such that I had little interest in making it a regular part of my life.
Plus, there was so much that I didn’t understand.
First, most recipes call for raw almonds.
Have you ever tasted a raw almond before?
They taste, to me, terrible, like waxy nothingness.
Why stretch this waxy nothingness into a glass of liquid?
However, you know that flavor you get when you deeply toast almonds to a nice milky coffee (mm, milky coffee) shade, that incredible flavor which is amazing in pastries as it is on salads and even for a plain snack?
Why weren’t we making almond milk out of toasted almonds — was it just the shade?
Does beige “milk” unnerve people?
And then — yes, I know, there’s more — I mean, I like almonds.
I do!
But I also love walnuts and pecans and hazelnuts.
Where’s the pecan milk?
Where’s the hazelnut milk?
Where’s the chocolate-hazelnut omgnutellamilk.
[Insert sound of a needle scratching off a record.]
Suddenly, I was very very VERY interested in vegan dairy products — although, typically, for all the wrong reasons, but it’s too late to change my ways now.
I toasted hazelnuts so they were quite dark.
I soaked them for most of a day in water.
I blended them until as pureed as possible.
I strained.
I squeezed.
And then I melted chocolate and whisked the toasted hazelnut milk in a little at a time.
I chilled it.
I poured it into tiny glasses and propped in bendy straws.
And then my darling little kindergartener arrived home from his first day at school and I said “Mama made you a chocolate snack!” and he was so excited and I poured him a glass and he said, “No.
I do not like this.”
I suppose it should be noted that nut milks are probably an acquired taste — if you’re not crazy about almond milk, this may not convert you.
But my husband and I loved it.
It’s barely sweet (though you can add a little sugar if desired) and tastes spectacularly of chocolate and hazelnuts, without the dairy products muddling the flavor — it will not survive the weekend.
It may not even survive this paragraph.
I am not proud of this, but I’m really just a one trick pony in the language department.
Sure, after four years of high school French and the shortest exchange program ever, I can get by in Paris and because of this, can occasionally make sense of written Italian or Spanish, but Czech?
German?
I couldn’t be further from makings heads or tails of it.
As you might expect, as Alex and I luckily found ourselves at some untouristy eateries in Vienna–without a waitstaff that catered to the language-deficient or menus reprinted in 16 world languages–quite a bit of Hilarity Ensued.
After many hours of walking on a hot day, Alex and I were beat, so we flopped down at a cafe and mindlessly asked for “iced coffees” completely forgetting that “ice” equals “eis” equals “ice cream” in German, and ended up with a big cup filled with coffee, cream, whipped cream and a scoop of vanilla gelato.
I wish all mistakes were this tasty!
Looking to offset the heavy dishes Central Europe, I also ordered something that I guessed was going to be a light, healthy vegetable strudel, something I’d imagined dreamily warm with crispy, flaky edges and something I was certainly going to want to repeat at home.
Unfortunately, I received a brick of rice with a few flecks of carrots and parnsips, wrapped in phyllo and smothered in a creamy herb sauce.
It all went very well with my eis Kaffee!
Nevertheless, this in no way diminished my dream to make my own vegetable strudel once I got home, so when I found a wild mushroom strudel recipe on Leite’s Culinaria, I was so eager to try it, I entirely forgot about my wholly justified Fear of Phyllo.
Here, just look at my first effort, doomed from the start.
I quickly realized that there was simply no way I was going to make this dish into the four burrito-shaped strudel the recipe suggested, and took matters into my own hands, dealing with phyllo the only way I am comfortable–in a technique I loosely adapted from Hogwash, or the very first time I saw a phyllo effort I thought I might actually be able to take part in.
Instead of stacking fragile sheet after sheet atop one another, you simply work with one at a time, folding into quarters and rolling your filling up into a little package, flag-style.
You end up with a neat little finger food, and, at least in my case, far fewer gray hairs at the end of the night.
(Alex’s too, as he heard me talking smack about the phyllo’s mother a lot less from the living room.)
Along with a big green salad, we ended up with a mighty delicious meal and I’m eager to make these again for a party sometime soon.
So, whose got some phyllo tips for me, should I ever get the nerve to try this again?
If there is one thing that Alex has shown me the light of over the course of our relationship–but fortunately, there are many, including ribs, pickles, bourbon and skiing–it’s the consummate beauty of a vacation that entails absolutely nothing.
No water skiing, no scuba diving, no afternoon of shopping, no conga lines: just hours upon hours on the beach, tearing through one book at a time.
Can you imagine how awful this must be after months of doing things and being ‘on’ and producing things of value for other people in exchange for earning a living?
I’ll tell you, it’s a big adjustment.
Day one is always a little bewildering; we find ourselves saying “Wow, a whole week?” “Seven DAYS of this?” and “What will we do with ourselves?” a lot.
Day two we start settling into the beach life–barefoot, sunscreened, our winter coats looking ridiculous hanging in the room’s closet–and make some dents in our books.
By day three, however, we’re pretty used to it all: the bluest–aqua, really–ocean we have ever seen, silky white sand, absurd 3 p.m.
cocktails called the Tropicolada and the uncanny ability to take a long post-cocktail nap despite having slept 10 hours the night before, and this is where everything descents into a haze.
Without a singular event or laughable attempt at productivity that will serve as a demarcation between the days, we tend to blink twice and its day seven.
We wonder how our families are doing.
We ponder what plans we have made for the weekend we return.
That is, under the best of circumstances.
However, this vacation, this last step–the one when we begin to miss little parts of our regular lives–went terribly awry, and I blame a lot of this on those evil Heavenly Beds they have branded at Westin Hotels.
It’s just not fair.
I used to love our pillow-top bed, our thick feather duvets and our down pillows but since I’ve been home, they’ve been a constant source of disappointment: my sleep experience has been ruined.
But that’s not all; this weather has been unseemly and in the greatest of indignities I have had to suffer through, its noon now and not a single waiter has offered to deliver a Tropicolada to my part of the sofa.
I cannot believe I am expected to subsist under these conditions.
Alas, this is the part where I am supposed to tell you about the Aruban cookbook I dutifully picked up at a gift store with mouth-watering recipes for fried plantains, coconut cake and pigeon pea stew and alarming ones for iguana soup, or at the very least, provide you with an approximation of a recipe for that tropical cocktail, but I’ve got none of that for you today because when I came home from vacation, all I craved was a classic iceberg wedge salad.
Yes, like the steakhouse kind–by land and not sea.
What can I say?
My cravings defy logic.
Bring me a Heavenly Bed and a coconut rum cocktail and I might be willing to discuss my inconsistencies.
Until then, this recipe is flawless in its own right.
With or without crumbled crispy bacon, I have always had a soft spot for these types of salad, likely harkening back to the days when they, along with a side order of broiled mushrooms and steamed asparagus, were all I consumed at steakhouses.
I know iceberg is the lowliest member of the lettuce family and that blue cheese dressing was supposed to have gone out of style with flannels but I think we all know how well that’s going, so I say dig in.
Nothing screams Seven Days Until Salad Season like a bacon salad!
Merry Christmas to all who celebrate it!
Muchos gracias: To my sister for keeping an eye on the smittenkitchen while we were away, so we could rest assured that it neither blew up nor left you all hanging while we hit the beach.
When I made my version of baked ratatouille back in July, I had intended to follow up with suggestions of other things you could do with leftovers, or leftover ingredients, as I always have leftover components but have not yet found a store that will sell me two-thirds of one zucchini and a half an eggplant.
I really hate having a quarter eggplant leftover, because I’m very unlikely to use it and incapable of throwing it away, so what usually happens is I stash it in the fridge where it gets forgotten about, rots, is found a month later as when I scream in horror and throw it away afterall, having flashbacks to that time I lived with three friends and we were cleaning out the fridge and found something completely awful way in the back and Dave said “sorry, that was my kiwi” and I was like, “uh, that’s a lemon.” 
I digress.
Here are some of the other ways we have used elements of this non-traditional “ratatouille”:
Breakfast: The leftovers make a great breakfast, whether folded into an omelet, crepe or as a base for a poached egg, my favorite.
I can find any excuse to eat a poached egg.
Pasta or Grain: (Sadly, no pictures of these next two) Take a small stack of extra vegetables and cut them into thin, julienned strips.
Repeat with remaining vegetables.
Saute some minced garlic and chopped onion in olive oil in a pan until soft, add the julienned vegetables and cook them until they just begin to soften, just a minute or two.
Pour one cup of the tomato puree or tomato sauce (a small can works great for this) and heat it until it simmers.
Season it to taste and toss it with pasta or spoon it over a cooked grain, from bulgur to barley or couscous.
This is one of my favorite “I will not gain weight over the holidays!” counter-attack meals.
Frittata: Repeat the julilienning process above, continuing it in the opposite direction, cutting the matchsticks into a fine dice.
Stir these bits and some finely sliced green onion into beaten eggs and cook as you would a frittata.
Serve topped with a small amount of heated tomato puree or sauce, goat cheese or feta.
Invite me over, please.
And now, one more for the list: ratatouille tart.
As has become an annual tradition, our families came over for a Hanukah meal on Saturday.
I chose to go the lunch route as I have never cooked a luncheon before and thought it might be a fun menu challenge.
Yes, I just said “fun menu challenge.” Snicker, snicker–I can hear you, you know.
I put down the pate brisee long enough to admit that there are other approaches to tarts, one in particular I have all but ignored on this site: pate feuilletee, or puff pastry.
You can’t beat it for easy prep (by that I mean buying it in the freezer section; making it at home is beyond the limits of even my craziness, right now), and when you’re making three tarts, latkes, soup, salad and a two-part dessert, it will be your very best friend.
This ended up being more of a fancy ratatouille pizza than a tart, but potato-potahto, I say.
All that mattered was that it was delicious, and I’d make it again in a heartbeat.
You too can save your sliced vegetables from kiwi/lemon fate!
I have the most boring thing, ever, to tell you today (and clearly it’s not “how to write an enticing lede”): I tried not to eat bread for a couple months.
Wait, come back!
Let me explain.
I don’t mean ever.
I am not anti-carb or anti-dessert, nor is Wheat Belly our new idea of a good bedtime story; I am ever your gluten-full host.
I remain certain that freshly-baked, crackly-crusted artisanal bread is one of the greatest things in the world; to turn it down a moderate serving of it when you’re able to enjoy it (chemically and all that) is a sacrilege.
But that’s not really what most of our bread looks like, does it?
Most often, bread is merely bookends on a sandwich, with the goal of making filling portable.
Or, it’s toasted so that it can sop up butter, jam or a runny yolk, or crouton-ed to make a salad feel bulkier.
It’s all too infrequently in and of itself noteworthy.
These latter categories of bread were what I suspected I wouldn’t miss if when I challenged myself to skip them.
That is, at least two meals a day: an ascetic, I am not.
But I promise, I didn’t drag you here today to sell you on a refined carb-free life as I myself have little interest in living one.
What I’d hoped to share was the neat thing that many less stubborn than myself have known of eons: when you tip the food scales away from lackluster bread-fill, a wonderful thing happens: vegetables, beans and protein come back into prominence, and it was just the cooking recharge that I needed.
To wit, since the beginning of the year we’ve talked about eggs baked in a nest of spinach and mushrooms (biscuits on the side), a seasonal mayo-light riff on devilled eggs, my new favorite three-bean chili (a small amount of brown rice underneath), chicken fajitas loaded with vegetables, beans, slaw, pico, and guacamole (all perched on one or two small corn tortillas) and a kale-quinoa salad I’m so addicted to, if I don’t have it for lunch at least three days a week, I feel twitchy.
I’ve also rekindled my love affair with I like to call “bruschettas” but in actuality the bread is something more interesting.
In the past, we’ve done this with thick discs of roasted sweet potato or eggplant; but raw avocado, scored and then mounded with a finely chopped, well-dressed salad is even more fitting for the warmer weather as it requires no cooking whatsoever.
One version has a Tex-Mex vibe, a riff on this black bean confetti salad with a chile-lime vinaigrette; the other drizzles finely diced radishes, cucumbers and scallions with a ginger-miso vinaigrette and toasted sesame seeds.
I couldn’t pick a favorite, so I decided not to.
OneLet me get the obvious out of the way: you are not going to win friends, neighbors with whom you share airspace or small children over with cabbage casserole.
It’s beige and gray with traces of drab green.
It’s cooked forever, or until whatever vim and vigor may have initially been in the leaves has departed.
At best, it’s akin to unstuffed cabbage, which means that it will be comfort food to some but torture to others.
However, if you are of the sort that has not yet been deterred (as you can see, I did my best), I have exactly the right thing for us to fill ourselves with on this face-freezing week of January* This preparation comes from the late, great English food writer Jane Grigson, whose writing and recipes I enjoyed long before I learned that she shares my disdain for beets —
We do not seem to have had much success with the beetroot in this country.
Perhaps this is partly the beetroot’s fault.
It is not an inspiring vegetable, unless you have a medieval passion for highly coloured food.
With all that purple juice bleeding out at the tiniest opportunity, a cook may reasonably feel that beetroot has taken over the kitchen and is far too bossy a vegetable.
— but, I won’t lie, even more so since.
It’s in this same book, her Vegetable book, that she writes about Stuffed Cabbage in the Trôo Style, one of the — because I want you to be aptly warned of exactly what you are dealing with here — five stuffed cabbage recipes in the chapter.
She speaks of visiting her neighbor who was making chou farci for her grandaughters that were coming to supper and being surprised when she peered under the lid not to find a big round stuffed cabbage but a flat layer of leaves.
Madame Glon, the neighbor, insisted that this “quick” method was just as good as the classic one (a whole cabbage, stuffed) and made a convert out of Grigson.
Grigson then, in the year 1978, answers several questions I anticipate internet commenters to ask in the year 2016, saying that she’s made it with various spicy and aromatic additions such as tomatoes, bits of bacon, herbs and so on, but has rejected them in favor of the “Trôo simplicity cabbage, good sausagemeat and butter,” which I — a dweller of the Lower East Side of Manhattan some 3600 miles away, where simplicity usually means limiting oneself to a single type of chile paste, imported sea salt and heirloom vegetable — hadn’t considered my dinner priorities until that exact second.
As my year’s theme so far is seeing something good and making it as soon as humanly possible we had it for dinner that very night, heaped on thick slices of whole wheat sourdough slathered with coarse Dijon mustard and now you can count us among the converts not just to the dish, but the idea that there’s a time and place for unfancy, unpretty, unpopular food too.
* when the other three tabs open in my browser are, predictably: 1.
out-of-my-budget arctic parkas, 2.
clever new ways to add even more cheese, sour cream and butter to baked potatoes, and 3.
a friend’s torturous beach vacation photos
I don’t mean to shock you, I mean, I do hope you’re sitting down for this, but it turns out that when I asked my husband to choose between a caramelized cabbage dish, mushroom tacos, or a beef stew whose ante had been upped with butter, bacon, Dijon, cognac and a splash of red wine as his ideal homemade Valentine’s meal, he chose the beef stew.
I could hardly believe it either.
I mean, between my delivered flowers, his cufflinks and the kid’s heart-shaped candies, I might have to mix things up next year just to rage against predictability.
This isn’t just any beef stew, however.
This stew is fancy.
It’s luxe and lush and so intensely flavored, if you’re anything like me, after one bite you’ll forget every crock pot attempt that yielded thin broths, tough meat, weak flavor and, always, unevenly cooked vegetables (potato mush and still-rubbery carrots, sigh), or at least I did.
It will an excellent consolation prize for a winter you’re totally ready to be done with, pretty as it can occasionally be.
Comfort is indeed the central theme.
The New York Times published this recipe one week after 9/11 as part of a piece by Regina Schrambling about the meditative aspects of long-cooking dishes with layers upon layers of flavor.
These days, and in this city especially, there’s usually so little reason to cook.
If you’re hungry, soup dumplings or Thai curry is always just a Seamless order away.
But if you’re feeling hollow, Schrambling writes, you can bake pumpkin bread or molasses cookies; you can lose yourself inside a recipe for a while and build something delicious where you thought there wasn’t much at all.
It’s the act of cooking, not the egg noodle-draped result, that feeds us.
On Friday, someone asked me if there was a food I was eager to try.
I answered that I’d never baked or even tried a single madeleine in my whole life.
Four hours later, I had done both, so emboldened by the suspicious ease of marking items off my wish-list, I next mentioned that I had yet to get that puppy I’ve been asking for.
No dice on that one yet.
It might have helped that I nabbed a few months back the madeleine pan my father bought for my mother way back in the day when she, too, was absorbed with French cookery.
I’ve realized lately that as much fun as it is to have shiny and new things for the kitchen, I like the appearance of the worn and, in this case, a wee dented ones better, from a time before there were silicon, non-stick and even miniature alternatives.
All homage to old and beat up bakeware aside, I’m not sure with a recipe like the one I tried, I’ll be getting much more use out of it than mom ever did.
While it’s so unlike a Dorie Greenspan recipe to do anything but send us catapulting into a buzzy baked good heaven, the one I used from her Paris Sweets book didn’t yield what I consider the stuff of florid food writing volumes.
The crumb was surprisingly big, almost cornbread sized, they were fairly spongy and not in a tender way and they definitely lacked for salt to balance and round out the sweetness.
They also had no hump.
My last gripe, that I underbaked the first batch (you know, the one I actually got good pictures of), can be wholly chalked up to inexperience, though it might have helped if the recipe told you to look for browned edges and not just a top that sprung back.
(That said, this, this, that and the other still make that cookbook a highly advised, fun purchase.) 
Despite all the hoopla around madeleines, they’re really easy to make, did not barrage through an avalanche of ingredients and better yet, the items are fairly standard in a home kitchen, which means I have no excuse not to bake up another batch very soon.
But first I’d love some advice.
Do you have a perfected technique, recipe or favorite experience with these vaunted cakes?
In the meanwhile, I am posting the recipe I used for reference, in case it provides any insight into what may have gone wrong.
And then I’m going to bug Alex to find out where my puppy is.
Look, I know it’s prime resolution time.
I realize that outside the 10 percent of you who have understandably succumbed to the explicit demands of the polar vortex with salted caramel brownies, the remaining 90 percent of you out there are swearing off carbs, gluten, fat, sugar, things that your grandmother wouldn’t recognize as food or things that even had a mother, while sweating off the holiday’s demons on stationary bikes.
(Although I’m sure no matter how bad you may think things got over the holidays, surely none of your children announced at preschool’s circle time that his mommy was going to have a baby, which was news to you?
Which led to you having to make an awkward joke about too many cookies in December?
Nope, surely none of your angels would do a thing like that.
Not unless they wanted to go to boarding preschool next year, right?)
Ahem, so I realize that for most people, dessert is not an option in January, but I’m just not among them.
I think that measured quantities of not excessively decadent desserts are exactly the key to resolution sanity and that there are few better vehicles of moderation-friendly desserts than pudding which is why in previous winters we’ve tackled everything from Chocolate Pudding (recently updated, even easier now), Vanilla Bean Pudding, Caramel Pudding, Almond-Vanilla Rice Pudding and Arroz Con Leche.
This year will be no different, except for the fact that this is the year that I come out as a tapioca pudding junkie, no matter how weirdly old-fashioned that makes me.
(… She types while dreaming of being huddled under an afghan in a granny cardigan with tissues stuffed in her sleeve.) 
I don’t know why tapioca doesn’t get more love in the pudding world, as it’s absolutely gorgeous, clear beads of an every-so-slightly chewy starch that’s basically the caviar of the plant kingdom and deserves an equal amount of adulation.
In a pudding, these pearls are stirred into a custard of your choosing; milk laced with cinnamon or vanilla are typical common, but I figured that if I going to make tapioca pudding, something that my husband doesn’t much care for (because he is wrong), I might as well include all of the ingredients that fascinate him the least (vanilla beans, coconut) so I could be reunited with all of my lost food loves at once.
Something this rich and luxurious benefits from contrast, and for that, I used some mango pureed with lime juice, and then, because I couldn’t help myself I make some whipped coconut cream as garnish, though I think a grating or two of lime zest or a scattering of toasted coconut chips would work just as well.
As is often the case in January, this includes a bit of longing for warmer places, places with palm trees, citrus and tropical fruit; places where one might not wail “nooooooooo!” when they realize they bought rotten mangoes and this means they need to risk hypothermia to return to the store; places where one might find the concept of Gore-Tex and ski socks a bit absurd for a grocery run.
Nevertheless, should such unimaginable places be as far from your reality as they are from mine, this dessert, 1/2-cup suggestions of islands of eternal summer, might be just the dessert for you too.
I wish I could tell you that I had good reasons for sharing this recipe today, earnest ones.
If I were a different sort of writer, I might dig deep into my past and crank out a few graphs about my late German grandfather, who ate a soft-boiled egg for breakfast every morning for as long as my mother remembers.
(Also, brisket for dinner.) Maybe I’d tell you about the period of 2004 when I did the same, pining for the perfect crouton, perhaps buttered toast fingers raised to a previously unfathomable level of deliciousness, but didn’t get to it until this week.
And while each story would be in some ways true, none are the actual truth, which is that we’re talking about soft-boiled eggs today because omg I found the cutest set of egg cups, egg cups with chickens!
and I had to buy them.
Yeah, shopping.
I told you the story would be better left to more artful scribe.
To buy them, however, I’d have to use them, and to use them, it was time to consider the crouton, and not just any crouton but the very most intensely delicious crouton I could dream up.
There’s an ample amount of melted butter and a slip of Dijon mustard, there’s Gruyère and a tiny bit of Romano cheese, whose kicky/nutty saltiness has me fixated lately.
There are herbs, too, and this whole mixture is literally caked onto fingers of sourdough bread, then roasted in the oven until bronzed, fragrant and tormenting.
Nevertheless, I hope you can forgive this extended, obsessive breakfast kick I’m on.
It’s what I do when the weather is warm and I crave lighter meals but spring produce is yet to be seen.
Plus, as we all know, eggs are hardly just breakfast food and these croutons needn’t be limited to breakfast.
Cut into cubes, they could turn the saddest bag of freakishly ever-fresh salad greens into something you’d eagerly anticipate (though, for this I’d probably swap smooth Dijon for coarse and add a press garlic clove as well).
And when those little green spears do emerge from the earth, I’d make this ribboned salad, with a couple of these on the side.
They also make excellent rewards for kitchen help, should you keep your own heap underfoot.
Today was my unofficial return to cubicle-land and it was great!
No really!
Little did I know all I had to do was fall down a flight of stairs to be overjoyed with the normalcy of showing up to work on a Monday morning.
I kid, of course, they’re really very nice to me even when I don’t show up bruised, achy and slinged, regaling them with the now-familiar saga of my drunken bar scrap.
But, it was an especially delightfully un-manic Monday as the sharp pain in my right rib cage has finally subsided leaving me with a shoulder that really doesn’t hurt much at all, and also, I’ve gotten this two-hand typing thing mastered so let’s celebrate!
Let us eat some cake.
Of course, there’s not a whole lot to say about my family’s sour cream cinnamon chocolate chip coffee cake except that a) It’s absolutely perfect in every possible way — soft, plushy bites of uber-moist goodness broken up by cinnamon-sugar crusted chocolate chips.
b) Be careful biting into it as it might make you feel unintentionally wronged by every coffee cake that has crossed your palate before it.
c) He hasn’t said it in so many words (except, notably, “If your mom isn’t making that coffee cake I’m not coming over for Yom Kippur.”) but I think it may be the real reason Alex married me.
And d) I’m not even offended.
I wore heels to the hospital when I showed up for my induction four weeks ago.
Heels.
And a sundress.
Oh, and my mother and I decided to walk there from the doctor’s office, since it was such a nice day (we only made it ten blocks, but still).
Heels.
Sundress.
A stroll on a lovely September day.
I say this not to point out how ridiculous I can be — because really, I believe it points itself out — but to outline this thing I do where I get an absurdly ambitious ideal in my head and spend the rest of my time trying to close the gap between the dream and my reality.
Hm, perhaps that didn’t make much sense.
Let me put it in food terms.
Before I had the baby, I attempted to spend some time baking and stashing, no, not practical things like meals to save us from an endless rotation of diner eggs and takeout pad thai, oh please no.
I made things like treats to woo extra-awesome care from labor and delivery nurses and granola bars that our families in the waiting room might enjoy and some date cake we could all enjoy with some fresh baby and coffee the next day.
Like I said, absurd.
I also imagined that we’d have an influx of visitors in the weeks after we took Jacob home, and realizing I’d have no time to put out my usual spread, decided to ambitiously bake some things we could set out as needed … like banana bread.
And lemon cake.
And scones.
Except I only got to the scones.
At least I picked good ones.
Enter the reality of life with a newborn and sure enough, baked goods are the last thing on our minds.
And of course we’d forgotten that these scones were stashed them in the freezer until an unusually calm Sunday this past weekend when two friends came by to meet The Cutest Baby Ever Baked (an objective assessment, of course, especially once tiny, elbow-patched Fair Isle sweaters are involved) on Sunday and I wanted to find something — besides wine, that is — we could snack on.
The pantry presented me with sorry options — wasabi peas, stale raisins, and half a box of Jelly Belly Sours, anyone?
— but there in the freezer were these forgotten scones.
I baked them still frosty until they were puffed, golden and made our apartment smell like a fondue pot (that’s a good association, trust me) and even though we were ridiculously overtired and even though the North Fork wine I’d been so eagerly anticipating only put me in a coma and even though Jacob managed to, shall we say Christen, the guest who had the misfortune to witness a diaper change (oops!) and perhaps this wasn’t the kind of calm gathering I had pictured in my late pregnancy haze, it was delicious and hilarious and I realize now that I wouldn’t want it any other way.
It was a 87 perfect degrees in New York City today and I spied an actual pumpkin at the farmers market.
I love this time of year, when you expect it to feel like fall but it decidedly does not; it’s like Bonus Summer: cool enough to bust out cardigans at night but warm enough it feels too soon to audition any of the heavier dishes to come this winter.
I’ve been gushing over what Sam Sifton called “valedictory meals” in The New York Times Sunday Magazine — “fall dinners pretending to be summer ones” — and I imagine that wedges of focaccia baked with a grape you can only find this time of year, a roasted tomato salad, many formats of cheese and a lush glass of pink wine would nicely fit the bill.
Still, it feels blasphemous saying this, given that this is a Claudia Fleming recipe and I adore her baking so, but it really drove me crazy.
The dough was too soft, there was more oil/butter in there than even possible to apply (and I’m not one who willingly cuts back on butter in recipes) and have you ever tried to seed a Concord grape?
Take a seat, it will be a while.
An almost paper-like exterior gives way to a gelatinous center that has no interest or inclination to give up its one to four (4!) seeds.
But when all that is done and you pull this from the oven, you might taste the most amazing focaccia you have ever eaten.
I know I did.
I couldn’t get enough of the sweet/salty/olive oil/grape/rosemary thing with the crisp edges and so much texture, it was nothing like those leaden squares speckled with dry olives you might be used to.
I imagine this will go into heavy rotation if we ever start having cocktail parties again.
Or cocktails.
Cooking this last week also forced me to reconsider something I never thought I’d have to.
Warning, a tangent is nigh!
One of my greatest pet peeves (and a conversation I encourage you to never start with me, because I just go on and on about how much it “annoys” me until you roll your eyes, or at least that’s what my husband does) is what companies get away with printing on product labels.
“A good source of calcium!” “Boosts childrens immunity!” “Fat free!” (Dude, it’s ketchup.) And especially: 100% juice!
(Welch’s).
Because I had eaten grapes (tons, actually, in the 9 months before this sock monkey thief came along) and they didn’t taste anything like that ridiculousless in the bottle.
How do they get away with making such false claims?
And then, last week I had my first Concord grape.
And guys, it tasted precise like… bottled grape juice (or Kedem, for those of you ushering in 5771 wine-free this week).
Have I been wr-r-r- (this word, it hurts) -ong?
Is it possible that nutritional claims made on labels might not be universally dubious?
Some people read Ayn Rand and suddenly have to reconsider everything they once thought they knew about the world; me, I ate a grape.
My mind has been buzzing with this new development, and I pondered it as I ate piece after piece of my focaccia heaven.
I’m thinking about making another batch, just so I can “consider” this some more.
You know what?
I’m having a fantastic summer.
Life is incredibly sweet, juicy opportunities for personal and professional development are cropping up left and right, we’re going to Napa in one month and — I’m thrilled.
Its terrible how little I like to talk about this, how fearful even the most level-headed of us can be of jinxing out all the good in the world by bringing it up.
I mean, really.
There is a difference between flaunting or bragging about a good life and celebrating it, or at least there ought to be.
Did I tell you Alex and I had a little paper airplane flying contest before we went to bed two nights ago?
Yeah, things are that kind of fun.
And then there are the cherries.
My god, we’re just swimming in them, a big bowl of cliché-come-true.
They arrived at our apartment two days ago via UPS in a refrigerated foil package from Batch’s Best Family Farms in Chelan, Washington via ChefShop.com.
They’re enormous; “so sweet and so cold” and I feel incredibly indulgent with my fuchsia-stained fingernails and belly full of ruined meals because I can’t quit snacking on them.
I keep thinking back to when I first moved to New York, seven years ago now, and I was so broke all the time that cherries, with their inevitable eight-buck price tag for little more than two handfuls were just not something I could eat as often as I wanted, which you know was daily.
And now there’s this.
Piles and piles of garnet marbles, such perfection in their original format that I felt guilty baking a significant lot of them into Ceres & Bacchus’s Clafoutis two nights ago–until I tried it.
What a glorious dessert, more like a thick crepe than any cake I’ve ever had, and even better cold the next morning with a scoop of plain yogurt.
If you’ve never made cherry clafoutis before, this will be a treat for you.
A real one-bowl show-off, and get this, if you’re going for tradition–and oh, you will once you learn how much easier it will make your life–you leave the pits in.
Larousse Gastronomique and other traditionalists insist that the pits impart a almond flavor when baked within the custard, something no authentic clafoutis should be deprived of.
Clafoutis is often made with plums or prunes (always soaked first in Armagnac), apples or blackberries, but some remind you that this is not, indeed, a clafoutis but a flognarde.
You know what I say?
I say there are about twenty cherries left in the fridge, and its time for lunch.
I hope you have a swell weekend.
This is pretty much October on a parchment-lined baking sheet.
They want to be packed in a basket so they can go apple picking with you and to sneak in the car to join you for a leaf-peeping drive.
They want to come to brunch with you and deserve to be served with warm apple cider, whether getting lost in a corn maze or searching for the best pumpkin to carve.
Have we spoken this week?
If we have, I’ve probably gone on and on about them, about how I never really was into that whole apple-cheddar thing but these, these changed things.
They’re absolutely fantastic.
They’re from The Perfect Finish, which is a dessert cookbook by Bill Yosses, who is now the executive pastry chef at The White House (but not when he wrote this) and Melissa Clark, who I suspect you’re already quite fond of.
When I first saw the recipe, I rejected it as fussy for making you roast apples (in one-sixteenths!) just to let a stand mixer bang them up.
I snorted over how chefs always like to boast that their recipes are “fairly simple” for home cooks but then use weights measured to the one hundredth of an ounce, fooling nobody.
And then I made them.
And I shut up because these are blissful.
Just a little sweet with a shaggy sugared lid, a not-too-intensely cheddar background with random chunks of baked apples throughout.
All that!
In a scone.
Oof, I’m obsessed and about to make my third batch because I don’t think I’ll be able to go anywhere this weekend without some, fresh from the oven.
Suddenly, it wouldn’t be October without them.
Don’t say I didn’t warn you.
The strangest thing has happened to me this summer; my obsessive pining for the next new recipe has waned.
Gone are the days when the thought of cooking something I have already made was enough to make me not cook at all.
Instead, it seems that this site is finally working for me: I have an archive of recipes I adore, largely ones that work as they should, and the answer to “What should we have for dinner?” is now, quite frequently, “Ooh, those kefta meatballs were so good.
Let’s have them again!”
Eager to break the routine of working and eating by myself nearly every single day since I began freelancing this summer, I had a friend over for lunch on Friday, but I also had a lot of work to get done that day.
Was this the time to make that new savory tart I have been eying for the fall?
No.
Was this time to go to the store and buy more stuff, when our refrigerator was already brimming with the remnants of our North Fork farmers’ markets finds the weekend before?
No.
It was time to make a simple tomato salad, zucchini carpaccio and, most importantly, to revisit my favorite quiche.
This was one of the first quiches I ever made, it remains one of my go-tos and I suspect it always will.
One of my favorite parts about it is the accessibility of the ingredients.
In some lucky cases, I already have them on hand, but that may just be because many of the ingredients are the core ones in my everyday cooking.
It’s also one of these gorgeous recipes that’s impossible to break.
I have made it with different cheeses and it still worked.
For an Atkins-prone family member, I have baked it in a greased glass quiche pan without a crust.
I have swapped the light cream with heavy, and gone in the opposite direction and used skim milk or even evaporated low fat milk.
I have used red or white onions instead of scallions; I have added a smashed clove of garlic.
I have par-baked the crust, but I generally don’t bother and don’t find it particularly soggy.
I have used a homemade tart shell and I have used a store-bought one, but I will not admit which one I worked with yesterday.
And I know what you’re thinking: Haven’t you already told us about this?
Yes, but if there is even one person out there that hasn’t made it yet that will so after today, this post will have fulfilled its quota.
P.S.
It makes an excellent Sunday night dinner as well.
I believe I owe you some soup.
When the soup was promised, it was rainy, bleary, and insufficiently May-like to please me, though I doubt Deb Not Being Pleased ranks anywhere on near the top of the concerns list of whatever powers control the weather (or, for that matter, Deb’s toddler when he’s set his mind to emptying mama’s purse on the floor again), seeing as we have another week of it on order.
Fortunately, this is a soup for exactly these trying spring times.
My love of hearty crocks of hearty French onion soup is well-documented (it’s the rare recipe I’ve covered twice in the archives, and you just know I had to riff on it here) because I have to insist that nothing is so loud with flavor as onions, cooked for an hour with a meaty broth and cognac, then broiled with a charred cap of strong cheese.
Oof, how long must we wait until it gets cold again?
But to me, French onion soup is a deep-winter affair, for cold, bleak days, not these.
This, however, should be its spring counterpart.
Instead of heavy yellow cooking onions, it uses Vidalias, which are a sweet onion (the sweetness is said to come from the low amount of sulfur in the soil) grown in Georgia* and available starting in mid-April, or, right now so hurry up and get them.
Instead of hearty beef, veal, or brown stock, you can use a milder chicken or vegetable.
Instead of being topped with a hulking mass of melted Gruyere, it gets bulk from wild rice and a punchy finish from floating rounds of blue cheese smothered croutons.
It’s an onion soup for puddly days like this, when you’re stuck inside after an all-too-brief sunny weekend.
It’s mild and faintly nutty from the rice, but it’s no weakling, its hearty enough that you’re not left scrambling for something else to accompany it for dinner or a lazy weekend lunch.
Last week was not my week in the kitchen, friends.
I had great, ambitious designs on a rhubarb meringue tart that would be pink and pretty with a scalloped tart-shell edge and a meringue that looked like piped roses that had toasted petal tips.
But as the week went on and as various really non-torments in the greater definition of the word but nonetheless tormenting to me mounted — thin curds, too thick curds, beige (you know, the color of pink rhubarb + multiple yolks) curd, slumped tart shells, wet meringues, useless broilers, blowtorches so close to empty, they emit the useless wisps of sleepy dragons, refill canister AWOL — my enjoyment of the project plummeted.
But, because I’d like to teach my kid one day that he should follow through and finish what he started, I did, and lo, it was good, you know?
Maybe I’m just not a meringue pie person and I forgot?
None of this matters because the finished pie slid off the plate flopping face-down into the open fridge as I tried to put it away and then, as I crouched on the floor in front of the open fridge scooping fistfuls of meringue and curd into a garbage bag and questioning my life choices, my son walked in and asked what I was making for dinner.
I took a break from the kitchen after that.
Sometimes, you just need some space, right?
See if time apart restores that magic?
Absence makes culinary ambitions grow fonder?
Not to be clichéd or anything (cough, ugh), but I did go get a pedicure and while I was there an email appeared on my phone from Tasting Table extolling the virtues of the Japanese vegetable pancake known as okonomiyaki and all I wanted to do was run home and make it, immediately.
That’s no small feat, considering the comfort of those massage chairs, and yet, if I were to wax philosophical for a moment, I would argue that this thing — when you think you’re done with cooking forever but see something new or different that’s so incredible, so doable, that you find all the minutes between then and when you’re finally able to get to the grocery store an irritant — is about the loftiest recipe goal there could be.
I actually got to making the pancakes a few days later, because life is like that, but please don’t wait so long because these are crazy delicious, filling and wholesome, as good as a side dish as they are as a main, topped with a fried egg.
From what I can gather, there are many, many ways to make okonomiyaki and that this is by design — according to Wikipedia, the name is derived from the word okonomi, meaning “what you like” or “what you want.” What most have in common is a base of cabbage, flour, and egg, fried in a small or large fritter pancake form — can I call them Japanese latkes without offending anyone?
Probably not, but there you are.
From this base, only you are limited only by your imagination; I’ve seen versions with everything from kimchi to shrimp or octopus, green onions or pork belly/bacon, but I kept with the relatively earnest version outlined in the newsletter, with cabbage, kale, carrots and scallions.
While okonomiyaki is often made omelet-like and thick, served in wedges, it turns out I like mine the way I like my potato pancakes, which is for them to resemble a flying spaghetti monster that ran afoul of a hot skillet and crisped up on impact in all of its straggly glory — i.e.
heavy on the vegetable, light on the batter, charred at the edges, tender in the center and absolutely impossible to stay irate at your kitchen long in the face of.
Here’s a thing I’ve been doing since the year began that’s made me very happy in the kitchen and it’s so simple, I completely expect you to roll your eyes at how un-revolutionary it is, but it goes like this: Find a recipe that sounds good to you and make it immediately.
Don’t put it in the queue; don’t save it on that to-cook-one-day list, just dive in and dig in.
So far, it’s been nothing but great; there was a giant egg bake, ugly cookies, green dinner pancakes, a giant cabbage casserole (recipe added!) we heaped on coarse mustard-slathered bread and a towering spaghetti frittata.
And while all of these things have been delicious, what’s been the most fun about them is getting back to a kind of impulsivity that’s gotten pushed to the wayside in this hyper-scheduled so-called adult life.
It’s also led to conversations I want more of in 2016, such as “well, if you’re around anyway, why don’t you stay for dinner and I’ll guinea pig a new recipe on you?” 
Which is how it happened that I spied a photo on the Instagram account of Elisabeth Prueitt of Tartine Bakery — someone I’ve long admired for both her baking talent and her refreshingly honest talk about being a working parent — last weekend that may not have normally been the kind of thing that got me running to the kitchen (a gluten-free cake, candied citrus rings, plus didn’t I just recently make a citrus-infused ricotta cake?) but why think too hard about it?
And, lo, I’m so glad we didn’t.
The recipe hails from the wonderful River Cafe Cookbook series, specifically the Classic Italian volume, and in its original format uses a mix of polenta and almond flour, whipped egg whites, butter, ricotta and lemon to make a thick cake that’s nothing like the dry cornmeal cakes you might have had in the past.
In fact, it’s so tender and rich, you might almost mistake it for a ricotta cheesecake (Prueitt attributes this to the lower baking temperature).
But what really caught my eye was Prueitt innovations; she uses a half-volume of the original for a thinner, delicate cake that she caramelizes orange slices into the reversed cake.
The first time we made it with tangerine zest and juice instead of lemon, and sliced almonds as a topping.
The second time, I had nabbed some blood oranges and made it with the zest, juice and candied rings, and nothing but almond flour.
Both were probably the best-received dessert I’ve made that didn’t involve chocolate, peanut butter or salted caramel and so pretty, they might be the literal opposite of this gray frigid morning of snow flurries.
About five years ago, my best friend decided to host Christmas Eve dinner at her new house, and I came over to help for what seemed like a lovely afternoon, but turned out to be, well, you know how cooking isn’t always fun when you’re all stressed out?
We made this mushroom galette and I remember thinking at the time it was one of the most elaborate things I’d ever made, but what I really meant was “pain in the ass.” It has all of these, well, steps, directions you’re not sure are utterly necessary or bettering of the end-product but you follow them because you don’t want to find out the other way that you should have just RTFM-ed.
This dish didn’t reappear in my life until a year ago June at my bridal shower, in the form of a card she’d tucked into a recipe book my sister compiled from guests.
I laughed when I looked at it: why would anyone ever make such a pesky recipe again?
Now, about the funk, or should I say, fungh: with over a pound of wild mushrooms and five ounces of blue cheese, this is not a recipe for feeble palated or stench-averted.
That I managed to find a blend with an especially pungent bouquet — a gigantic fresh porcini (two stores were out of the more-affordable dried), a few ounces of mousseron (a new discovery, and possible favorite), oyster and shiitake — didn’t reduce the overall olfactory impact, either.
All minced together, it like the great cave door at Murray’s had been swung open, and for the half of you whose stomachs haven’t turned at the thought of this, you know what a good thing it must be.
While the recipe is on the fussy side — freezing flour, rolling out a sticky dough and then pushing back the finish time even further by cooling the filling first — not a one of these steps does anything but improve the outcome.
I think of this like a great side dish for a dinner party; it’s rustic enough that it won’t upstage any rack of lamb or Thanksgiving turkey, but intense enough that it will get the affection it deserves.
And for a wiped-out Wednesday?
Well, 10 p.m.
is never too late to have the best part of your day.
The Food Network had the audacity (I am joking, a little) to air an episode of Barefoot Contessa in which she makes a “scalloped” dish with bread cubes, garlic, basil, Parmesan and the brightest most summer-bursting-forth, musta-tasted-like-the-heavens-above, thanks-for-rubbing-it-in-guys tomatoes over the winter, when there was absolutely nothing I could do to bring this dish into my kitchen.
It wasn’t fair.
It felt outright mean.
For people as berserk about summer tomatoes as I am — people who avoid them in the off seasons, when they’re tomatoes in name only — being reminded of that which is as impossibly far off as the notion that there are days in the summer that are so hot, we actually long for the kind of weather that requires Gore-Tex and hot cocoa.
It’s basically crazy talk.
Well, that day is today.
Seriously, every time I arrive at the market during this wretched July, I am so hot, I’m almost dizzy (Do I remember my water bottle?
Of course not.
Do I feel like a tool for whimpering over the heat while carousing with people who work in fields all day?
Um, yup.) and I cannot remember a single thing I had meant to buy because the sun, it’s like blistering my brain and ooh look!
Tomatoes!
Ah, summer, that’s why I keep you around.
I remembered this though: buy tomatoes, lots of them.
Buy basil, a little of it.
Buy a loaf of bread.
Go home.
Make it happen.
I didn’t forget you, Ina, and your charming barn kitchen witty friends scalloped tomatoes.
I sliced and diced and sautéed and minced and even turned the oven on and proceeded to have the best lunch I’ve eaten all summer.
I’m literally about to walk back into the kitchen a get some more.
Yes, I know it is 4 p.m.
and I might ruin my dinner but I don’t care.
If it had even a whiff of tomato, it was ruined anyway; it would never compare.
Fellow (and future) tomato junkies, come and get your fix below.
P.S.
Weekend morning leftovers?
Try it with a poached egg on top.
I first learned about ruffled milk pie from Vefa’s Kictchen, a substantial Greek cooking volume that first came out in 2009.
A type of galatopita (“pie made with milk,” aka a baked custard pie), this is more striking in appearance than most due to wound and rumpled sheets of pastry, which also provide texture and crunch.
It’s so pretty and it sounded so simple — there are 7 ingredients and I bet we keep 6 of them around —  it was absolutely, unequivocally something I could get into and want to tell you about immediately save one thing: it uses filo.
And would rather do almost anything than work with filo.
And I have!
I’ve had two kids.
I’ve written two cookbooks.
I’ve moved apartments.
I have planted gardens and taken up running and gone on vacations and okay, maybe I didn’t do all of these things just to avoid using filo in one single recipe, but I can tell you that when the top two items on my to-do list sifted out last week as 1.
Purge too-small clothes from kids’ overstuffed dressers, and 2.
Make ruffled milk pie, I at last found something I hated more than more than I dreaded working with filo.
I am pleased to tell you that my kids clothes are still an unmitigated disaster but this pie is fantastic.
“Geez, Deb, what did filo ever do to you?” Fair question and, in short, it stresses me out.
It tears and cracks.
It likes to dry out before you can blink and it’s unforgiving once this happens.
You’re supposed to keep a piece of plastic on the open package of sheets followed by damp towel on it but when I run a towel under faucet and wring it out, it’s always too heavy and wet and manages to glue all of the sheets together at the edges.
I’ve opened up boxes that were nothing but shards.
I know, I know, way to sell a recipe, Deb.
[Don’t worry, I’ll share some tips for the filo-averse below.]
But the best news is that everything that can potentially be terrible about filo does not matter here.
Your sheets can tear and crack and break instead of ruffling in places and this pie will be exactly as good because the filo provides volume and texture, but it doesn’t hold anything.
In fact, this is closer to a … crispy filo bread pudding or a noodle kugel made with filo rosettes than it is what we think of as pie.
And look, I know looks aren’t everything (but your hair looks fantastic today) but just look at it.
It’s not just pretty from the top, it’s pretty within each slice, and I think it’s exactly what your weekend brunch/lunch/afternoon needs.
My in-laws had a cocktail party on Saturday night and in case you are new here, what this meant was that there was so much food, just the of plating of the appetizers took four people nearly an hour.
(It also means that although there was much conversation and liveliness, I captured none of it.
“Alex, what are they laughing at?” “He told a joke.” “What was it?” “It was funny.” “Thanks.”)
This would be but half the magnificent spread, not including the Cheese Table, which was not, mind you, a slew of cut-your-own cheese wedges and loose grapes but actual cheese-showcasing appetizers.
Of course, don’t be fooled by the small bites; there was still a main course.
(I was too stuffed to get near it, but I hear the apple and stuffing-stuffed turkey was delicious.)
Nope, nobody does anything small around there, the guests included.
The guest who offered to bring some fruit for dessert brought so much, it needed to be carried in a box that once housed a case of champagne, and there was so much leftover, Alex and I currently have a giant salad bowl filled with fruit in the kitchen (thank you!) and another in the fridge.
But, the Grand Finale, the Dessert to End All Desserts, was from the guest who offered to make a Russian Napoleon, not very different from the ones we are used to except that it’s covered in a lovely crumble of pasty.
But, she didn’t just bring this; she brought a centerpiece.
The top layer was comprised of lady fingers swaddled in a raspberry cream frosting — each slice of it resembled gorgeous cobblestones — and topped with not just assorted candies, but a white chocolate basket she had crafted from her own mold.
We remain awestruck.
I brought my share of contributions, too: truffles, parmesan biscotti, pecan bars (yup, we still have some in the freezer, can we say “my god, please make a half-recipe next time?”), gougeres and stuffed mushrooms.
I made gougères the first time this past summer, and we instantly fell in love.
I can’t imagine anything more lovely to go with wine than a choux pastry (the type you would make eclairs or cream puffs with) plus two cups of shredded cheese.
I had a little more success the first time, namely because I got lazy this time and shredded the cheese in the food processor, which makes lovely confetti-like pieces, perfect for latkes, a little heavy for something you hope to be eventually light and air-like.
Hand-shredding on a box grater seems to be the name of the game with cheese puffs.
Last time, I used a mix of cave-aged gruyere (my favorite) and parmesan but as my mother brought me a wedge of Jarlsberg at Hanukah so big, if you dropped it you might break a toe, this time I replaced a cup of the gruyere with it.
No matter, the flavor was just as delicious.
One more “I’d do differently next time”: In a rare use of gray salt, I sprinkled the tops of the puffs with it right before baking.
The first time I did this, we ate them right away and it was dreamy and crisp.
This time, we ate them the next day and as I should have already learned by now, anything salt-topped left for a day gets a little damp on the outside and drained of moisture on the inside.
Next time, if there will be a day between baking an eating, I’ll skip the salt on top.
After I told him I liked my usual stuffed mushroom recipe, but was in the mood for something less earnest and healthful, my bacon and cheese-loving husband found this sinful delight on Epicurious.
The filling is so good, it takes restraint not to eat it by the spoonful, so consider yourself warned.
I had a terrific and by no means life-altering discovery this weekend — er, unless you’re me, and the concept of ‘having a life’ is an abstract one, at best — which was that my favorite dead-simple green bean and cherry tomato salad was even awesomer when made with (I hope you’re sitting down this, people) a mixture of green and yellow beans.
Really!
And I know, why on earth would I bog you down with my most snooze-worthy discoveries?
Because yesterday morning when I received a call asking if I’d like to be on Good Day New York today demonstrating some July 4th-worthy salads and sides, my first thought was, “ooh, I can make the prettiest green bean salad!” Followed, of course, by “wait, I have like three hours of free time today and no groceries a doctors appointment and zillion things to do and even more things to cook and I’m overdue for a haircut and my fingernails look like they’ve been through a paper shredder and not a single cute dress to wear and zomg I am not ready for my closeup!“, or you know, the usual neuroses.
I said yes, of course.
I am pretty sure that’s what you’re supposed to do when a morning show asks you to be a guest, not that my life has given me a lot of practice pondering such weighty conundrums.
Thus, if you’re coming here today because you saw Deb and her double-chins on Good Day New York this morning, welcome!
Here’s what else I showed off today:
I love fall.
I mean, I know how decidedly unoriginal that is to say, but I can’t help it.
I just want to inhale it, take a picture of every flame-thrown tree, mull over all of its cider and crunch through all of its dried leaves.
I have been fortunate enough to marry someone who feels exactly the same way, but the only problem is figuring out how to make fall longer than it is and that solution, my friends, is to drive north to catch the early show.
We headed upstate last year for the weekend and stayed at the most sigh-worthy B&B–where every window is ringed with tiles of stained glass and a man named Richard makes you amaretto-brushed French toast on Sundays–and made a point to get back there this year.
Of course, its hard to predetermine when fall will peak; last year, we felt that we were a week too late, this year, we went a week earlier and felt that we were two weeks early.
I hear an 80-degree October will do that.
Nonetheless, I have a whole new appreciation for early fall.
I used to eschew its predominantly green cast and lack of ta-da shrubbery, but now I really get its charm: how else will a few superstars stand out?
I think I spent a good half of the weekend coming up with new recipes, to the point that I’d start with a “what do you think of a blahblahingredientblah?” and Alex would say “write that down, too!” until the list was long and I simply couldn’t wait to get home, which actually brings us to 3:30 a.m.
Wednesday when my flight from the business trip I squeeeezed in touched down.
Ever since I posted about the wild mushroom and stilton galette last year, I have been angling to come up with a new filling for it.
I wish I could tell you how many hours I have pondered alternative fillings, but then you would know what a hapless nerd I am and I try to pipe down about that.
But I can stop contemplating it because this is it– caramelized onion, sage and butternut squash with “stinky cheese” (according to my original note).
This free-form tart is just the embodiment of fall to me: weightier than a tomato tart, lighter than a thousand mushroom quiche and absolutely glorious with a good, rich stout.
Now, I wasn’t trying to recreate the filling because I disliked the old one–oh, heck no–it was because I am obsessed with the galette dough.
It’s just one of those doughs that comes together so perfectly every single time–stretchy and smooth, dense and cold but never brittle–it begs to be used again and again.
I want to stud it with coarse sugar and fill it with sweetened apples and whole cranberries.
I want to fold it into half a dozen empanadas.
But mostly, I just want you to make one of these and one of the wild mushroom stilton variety and bring them to your next dinner party, reveling in all of the delicious things that have brought you back indoors again.
Remember those 17 flourless/Passover-friendly desserts?
Did you wonder why one would make a list that numbered, say, 17 and not some easily identifiable round number such as 20?
I mean, once you’ve gotten to 17, are those last three so difficult, so clearly going to push a blogger over the edge that it simply cannot be done?
No, you don’t think about this?
Well, lucky you.
But the list was indeed 20 to begin with, but I nixed* three because although they had very little flour in them and the odds were that it could be replaced with matzo meal with little melodrama, I didn’t want to wing it and accidentally ruin every one of your seders with my misplaced confidence.
(So much for saving us all some melodrama.) Yet I’ve been staring down the Gâteau aux Amandes with Strawberry-Rhubarb Compote from Thomas Keller’s Bouchon cookbook for months now–a fairly simple cake with what I hoped would be a very intense almond flavor.
As I’ve mentioned before, I’ve got some marzipan junkies in our family, so I like to use seeing them as an excuse to try out desserts like this, and it did not disappoint.
If you like almonds/marzipan/almond paste/amaretto, you’re going to love this cake.
However, yours will in all likelihood look better than ours did: less dense (because you’ll be using flour) and taller (because you’ll not realize at the very last moment that you left your 8-inch cake pan at a friends several months ago during a flan flop and used a 9-inch pan instead).
But even if it doesn’t, I think you’ll fall in love: the cake is intensely flavored but remarkably simple–six ingredients and some decoration on top.
The strawberry-rhubarb compote is fantastic; easy to make and a perfect balance to the sweetness of the almond paste base.
You’ll have a bit of extra, perfect for cottage cheese, ice cream, pound or angel food cake, or, you know, your spoon.
Oh come on, you know you’re gonna.
* See honey?
NIXED.
You see, last night I attempted to overcome a Scrabulous game of all-vowels, all-the-time against Alex who was been on a rare three-bingos-per-game winning streak with the word NIX over a well-placed triple letter score and do you know what Alex said?
“Nix?
What kind of word is that?
You never use that word.” And I said “only all the time.” So there you go.
And no, in case you were worried, we do not, like, sit on the sofa next to each other with a laptop on each of our laps playing Scrabulous with each other.
Of COURSE not.
That would be lame.
** The other two desserts I was going to bring to your might-be-able-to-swap-the-flour-with-matzo-meal attention were the Hazelnut Brown Butter Cake from last month (with only 1/3 cup of flour) that I am thrilled to learn that someone Kosher-ed with success and this Lemon-Strawberry Roll Cake (with only 1/4 cup of flour and cornstarch that can be seamlessly swapped with potato starch).
My obsession with Robert Linxe’s truffles started as a matter of coveting.
My roommate at the time had more suitors than she could count on two hands and both feet, thus I didn’t even bother trying to keep up, but there was this one–and I never met him, but still called him my favorite–who insisted upon “borrowing” her for the afternoon of her birthday and at Metropolitan Museum presented her with two items: Kissing in Manhattan and a box of chocolate truffles from La Maison du Chocolat.
Kissing in Manhattan was gorgeous–the rare book in Alex and my towering bookcases that we both, two years later, came with a copy of–but the truffles were something else.
Not only were they the most rich and hands-down putting to shame any and every chocolate I had ever encountered previously in my life, they were painfully expensive.
It just wasn’t fair.
In an effort to build my karma they became my go-to hostess gift and it was because of this that I learned one year at a holiday dinner where a Gourmet editor was a guest that the secret of the Robert Linxe’s La Maison du Chocolat Truffles were not sealed in an offshore vault along with the original Coke recipe and the location of Jimmy Hoffa but free for the clicking on Epicurious.com.
So, this is the point in the story where I am supposed to run home and make them the very next day, but this doesn’t happen for two reasons: one, she said that she’d made them, but it had been the kind of endeavor where you end up with chocolate from the floor to the ceiling and two, it involved these:
And latex gloves are scary.
Flash-forward two years–two years in which I have conquered babka, bread making, tortilla de patatas and multi-hour braises–and I realized this past weekend that it was time for me to conquer my fear of latex gloves, I mean, Robert Linxe’s Chocolate Truffles, once and for all.
And seriously?
I was scared of this?
They are not very difficult and unlike many other famed recipes that never taste at home they way they do when cooked by the recipe’s creator, they taste precisely like the original goods–a mildly bitter soft truffle encased in the thinnest, flakiest, most barely-there shell of hard chocolate and dusted heavily in unsweetened cocoa.
And finally, they can now be mine anytime I want them–and yours too.
This has been my go-to cheesecake for as long as I have cooked.
Gourmet Magazine published it in 1999, but the recipe hailed from Santa Fe’s Three Cities of Spain coffeehouse* a place I didn’t know a thing about until this week, when curiosity got the better of my intentions to something succinct about cake for once in my food blogging life.
Up the road from an artists’ colony, it was apparently a popular hangout in the 1960s for local bohemia, hosting an eclectic mix of entertainment from poets and musicians to foreign films.
It closed in the mid-1970s, probably around the time Santa Fe was starting to become too expensive for starving artists.
Canyon Road, once dirt, was paved.
From Googling, it looks like the old adobe home that housed it (apparently built in 1756) became Geronimo restaurant (named after the man who built it) in the early 1990s, and is still open today.
What does this have to do with the cheesecake they kept in the pastry case?
Very little, friends — and please correct me if this Manhattan-ite got any Santa Fe details wrong — but I can’t resist a cake with a story.
My cheesecake story is much less interesting; this site’s archives would tell you otherwise but I came late to it.
My husband loves it, many of you who read this site seem to love it, and I don’t… dislike it, I just don’t need more than one or two slices a year.
I find it so heavy and overly monotonous; I always wish the proportions were different, say, the same amount of buttery crust and whatever topping you wish but a thinner layer of baked cream cheese custard.
It not a testament to my mental acuity that it took me this many years to figure out this was the easiest way to make it happen.
As bars, the taste is less heavy, it feeds a lot more people, and it’s portable, meaning it can go anywhere you want to this weekend (your friends thank you, in advance).
What I’ve always loved about this cheesecake is the dead simplicity of it — 3 bricks of cream cheese, 4 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, some vanilla — and the creaminess despite the lack of sour cream or other dairy within.
There no flour and no fuss.
If your cream cheese is soft enough, you could whisk it entirely by hand.
It’s much less sweet than most, so it doesn’t taste like, say, baked cream cheese frosting, and it’s topped with a layer of barely sugared sour cream that’s baked right onto the cake.
I think it’s brilliant; it’s a harmonious accent and visually pleasing but more importantly, since I have very little patience for baking in water baths (although with bars like this, and not a potentially leaky springform, it would be as easy as it gets), this topping hides any cracks that might appear.
I had intended to maybe marble in a berry sauce — I think berries against cheesecake is aces — but then I went to the Greenmarket where berry season is in full swing so and everything was so pretty, I couldn’t possibly bring myself to cook them and piled them on instead.
But this recipe is flexible and I think you could easily tweak it in a number of ways:
•	Skipping the sour cream topping and adding a slick of whipped cream instead, although I would do this closer to serving and eating it.
•	Marbling it with a raspberry or other sauce, as we did here.
•	Topping it with a chocolate glaze, as we did here, or starting the bars with a chocolate base, as we did here.
•	Adding the finely grated citrus zest of any kind that you like by rubbing it into the sugar before adding it to the cake.
•	Marbling the top with dulce de leche before baking it.
•	Using a more traditional cooked fruit topping, as we did here.
* rather the loveliest name, says someone heading to Barcelona next week, albeit with a heavier heart than anticipated 
September is my favorite in food, weather and outlook.
The number of days above 90 degrees finally peters off.
I live for cardigan weather.
I love that it goes in with a beach weekend and goes out with cinnamon sticks and warm cider.
The markets are still teeming with peaches and plum, zucchini and eggplant, but you can also go apple picking and find some fancy new squash to cook.
But my cooking always feels like it’s on one team or another — we’re either making caprese or we’re baking ziti, little for the in-between days.
Where are the intersections of summer and winter squash?
Where’s the peach and grape pie?
Let’s fix this.
If you can read about something called a magic peach cobbler that you make more or less entirely in the pan you bake it and not have it in the oven, say, 15 minutes later, you are made of stronger stuff than me.
It comes by way of the grandmother of Ian Knauer and if you go way back on this site, you’ll find he’s also the person behind those exquisite Brown Butter Brown Sugar Shorties from his days at Gourmet.
These days, he’s got a place called The Farm Cooking School in Stockton, New Jersey and spoke recently about his grandmother who, with seven kids, had no time to fuss with anything but straightforward recipes like this.
I have scoured hundreds of recipes and concluded that nobody agrees on what a cobbler is aside from being cousins of grunts, pandowdys, slumps, dough-boys and, no, I will never get tired of referencing baked goods with funny names.
Most recipes agree that there’s fruit at the bottom and topped with either a cake batter or dollops of biscuit or dumpling dough, and sure enough, we have examples of each in the archives one with cornmeal drop biscuits and another with a crispy cake lid.
But this renegade grandmother — sounds like a good life goal, tbh — doesn’t even follow those rules.
There’s butter, an eggless pancake-like batter over it  and then the fruit goes on top and in the oven gets enveloped like a buckle–style cake, creating deep pockets of collapsed fruit and crisp edges.
You scoop it, still warm, from the dish so that the vanilla ice cream on top quickly succumbs unless you finish it first.
I believe you have it in you.
I usually try to shield you from examples of my various forms of Crazy, but in this case, it’s just too relevant not to own up to.
You see, I’ve got all sorts of superstitions about pies, with each and every harebrained theory derived from some near or actual pie disaster in my past.
There’s the theory that pies can smell fear; if you’re certain your pie will be a mess, it becomes something of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Then there’s the theory about making anything but the simplest lidded pie in the summertime, as the heat and humidity defies any level of air conditioning and makes your pie dough melt apart, no matter how many times you chill the dough.
I also believe that pie recipes can be curses, because not every apple has the same level of sweetness, tartness and liquid and it’s nearly impossible to come up with a core recipe that works each time.
In short, my pie superstitions could be summed up as, “Shh.
The pie can hear you.”
Now that we’ve gotten all of that out of the way, I would like to take this moment to tell my inner crazy person to, seriously, chill out.
Some recipes are just wonderful.
Some pies are delicious, even if they are not the height of consistency each time you bake them.
Certain pies, like, say, this Lattice-Topped Strawberry Rhubarb Pie, should be made every Memorial Day weekend, creating the most delicious bridge between rhubarb and strawberry season, during the most welcome break between winter and summer.
It even fits neatly onto a list of 30 Ways to Be a Good Guest, except for the part that you don’t get to clean out the remaining scraps in the tin with a fork by yourself, once you’re alone with it again.
Sigh.
Nobody could mistake me for a person who moves quickly.
I “run” at a treadmill speed that would never catch a thief, and barely these days, a preschooler on the loose.
It took us 3.5 years, until two weeks ago, in fact, to finally put the kid’s toys away.
We’ve been “redecorating” the living room for the better part of a year — we’ll probably put the pictures back up in a week or six; please, don’t rush us.
Thus, it should surprise nobody that it’s taken me nearly four years to conquer the cake you see here, which sounds even worse if you consider that it was a special request from my own mother, as this was her favorite growing up.
In my defense, in that period of time, I moved apartments, had a kid, wrote a book, and went on a 25-city book tour, all while (mostly) keeping up with this here website and spending a truly horrific amount of time staring slack-jawed social media ahem, maintaining occasional hobbies.
But I know the truth, which is that I’ve been intimidated by making it because I felt like I was cooking blind.
The Bee Sting Cake (Bienenstich) is a German specialty and while my mother’s parents came over in 1935 and 1936 respectively, the areas once known as German epicenters (the middle of Queens, where my mom was raised, and Yorkville, in the Upper East Side of Manhattan) have now mostly dispersed, and most of the accompanying stores have shuttered.
Calls to German bakeries to see if they sold it were almost futile, until I found one in Ridgewood, Queens that sold us a whole one that was rather awful; let’s not speak of it at all.
The only thing left to do was go it alone, researching obsessively along the way.
What everyone seemed to agree on was that the cake was a yeasted one, baked round or in a sheet pan, barely sweet, but topped with a crunchy almond-honey-butter caramel.
It’s from this topping that the name, and a story (always a story with cakes, yes?
forgive me, but the premise here seems awfully thin) emerged, something about a bee being drawn to the honey topping and stinging it/it not being an authentic bee sting cake unless it has been stung.
Needless to say, this has not been stung.
I’m okay with that.
The filling I understood to be classically made as a pastry cream, sometimes lightened with whipped cream, but you’ll find an equal number of versions that call for packaged pudding mix instead.
I probably don’t need to tell you which way I went.
From there, the Great Week Of Bienenstich Experiments (GWoBE) — it was kind enough to coincide with us finding two one-pound bags of sliced almonds in the freezer.
[Seriously; who loses track of this stuff?
Wait, don’t answer.]  During Round 1, I learned that — get this — yeast goes bad, especially 1.5 years after its expiration date.
Who knew?!
The cake was otherwise delicious, but the batter too wet to even consider doming, yeast issues aside, and the topping was sad and pale.
It was too sweet and needed more salt.
Round 2 produced a lovely cake, bronzed caramel lid, but a too-thin custard filling, the result of me attempting to make it while dictating a grocery list for that weekend’s Lasagna Bolognese to my husband, and omitting an ingredient in both, grr.
Round 3 looked like the platonic ideal of a bee sting cake, but the filling was too soft and the cake too hard.
This is when I should have stopped.
I didn’t stop.
In Round 4, I decided that the wet batter might have been onto something, and that was, the most tender cake of any of the rounds.
Having no German grandmother peering over my shoulder to tell me which turns would doom any claims of authenticity forever, I decided that doming was overrated, and a tender, soft crumb was the only thing that would ever make me happy.
This was my favorite cake body, but I decided at the last minute to lighten the pastry cream with whipped cream and it … was so soft that it squeezed out the sides when you put the top half on, the way you always hope an overstuffed Oreo would but never does.
By Round 5, it was my mom’s birthday and I thought if I ever saw a bienenstich again, I might run in the other direction, but I made it anyway, because I guess I rather like my mom.
For dinner, we had this soup, this salad and this lasagna, and for dessert, the finest bee sting cake I’ve yet to taste.
Two weeks ago, pre-GWoBE, that wouldn’t have been much of a claim, but a lot can change in two weeks.
Adding to my infinite list of gastronomical oddities–I consider meat a side dish, cilantro tastes like dirt to me, I don’t drink tea and the only seafood I can stand is mussels–Alex and I finally ate at Mario Batali’s heroical West Village gastropub, The Spotted Pig, two weekends ago and all I’ve been able to talk about since were the salads.
With house-cured bresaola, prosciutto and various homemade sausages on the menu, it’s not named after swine for nothing.
And while these are not to be overlooked, the salads were something of a symphony.
I’ve said before that I don’t go to fuss-worthy restaurants because I fancy myself some sort of in-the-know foodie; I go for inspiration.
Restaurants that don’t give me any new ideas for the Smitten Kitchen rarely get revisits.
In this case, it the muse turned out to be something as humble as lemon juice.
Each of the salads we tried were topped with a healthy glug of lemon juice, and, seriously, I use lemon juice when I cook all the time but I don’t think I have ever finished a dish with it.
I just love an everyday culinary revelation.
Its sour splash on top of the roasted carrots with avocado and cumin salad shifted something winter-y to summery, and on top of the mixed bean salad… well this I had to make at home ASAP.
Of course, ASAP was actually “two weeks later” meaning that I couldn’t quite remember which three beans the restaurant used in the special, or whether it had any herbs or onion in it.
No matter, though, because this is the way that I will make it from this day forward.
I know that a mixed string bean salad can sound like Dull City, but this is anything but.
It’s a bit spicy, sour-edged and incredibly fresh, I officially have a dish I am craving more than the Quick Zucchini Saute.
Good riddance!
Elsewhere: If ‘Ratatouille’ Had Been ‘Mulligatawny’ — Over on SeriousEats.com, I question our cinematographic culinary biases in the first of my weekly food trend posts for them.
Come and say hi!
One year ago: Ina Garten’s Barbecue Sauce
My in-laws had their 35th anniversary this past week, and if you’ve been taking notes up until now (though why would you) you can imagine that this only created one requirement whichever dessert I brought to a barbeque this weekend: chocolate.
Also, if it could have chocolate on top of that chocolate, it would be good too.
And did we mention chocolate?
Because we’re really into chocolate, and no amount of chocolate would be too much.
This guy I married, who thinks that there are few higher kitchen callings than a chocolate-crusted, ganache-coated cheesecake with cubes of brownies inside?
He didn’t develop this obsession in a vacuum.
Epicurious has been such a superstar lately in locating cake recipes so decked out in praise, half my work is done for me, I couldn’t resist calling on it again, this time pulling up some ungodliness by the name of Double Chocolate Torte.
One pound of chocolate and three-quarters of a pound of butter later, I think we hit a new record of caloric indecency.
Eyes popped and stomachs rumbled at the sight of this chocolate-roaring beast, which was really a torte because the cake–an almost-flourless cocoa bomb–is just the base for a super-thick layer of mousse.
A slick of unsweetened whipped cream tops the mousse layer, then a layer of fresh raspberries (or what would have been a full layer if the ridiculously overpriced raspberries we’d bought weren’t half past-their-prime) and I wish I could show you how gorgeous the cross-section was, but the camera battery had the nerve to die just as we were digging in.
You’ll have to trust me: it’s a stunner and I wouldn’t change a thing about it, except to not eat a single thing for the entire day before it.
This baby demands your stomach’s complete attention.
Elsewhere: Over at Priceless.com today, I have some photos and a short blurb about the Doughnut Plant on Grand Street, and I suggest that you don’t go over there at all if you a) are hungry or b) have a weakness for old-fashioned deep fried deserts in new-fangled flavors.
Like Valrhona chocolate glazed.
Or tres leches-tunneled.
Or square ones with homemade jam in burrowed each corner.
Mastercard cannot be held responsible for drooled-upon keyboards.
Really, it says so in my contract.
To unforgivably botch something great, if all of humanity’s problems stem from man’s inability to sit quietly in a room alone, I’m starting to believe that all of Smitten Kitchen’s problems stem from my inability to leave exquisitely simple things like berries and cream alone.
Or maybe it’s about me being unable to sit in a room alone with strawberries and cream and not eat them?
One thing is clear; I think we know better than to entrust me with the work of great philosophers ever again.
I’m sorry, Pascal.
Let me rewind.
Because my son has been going to a day camp across town this summer, I’ve had a lot more excuses to swing by the big Union Square Greenmarket on my way back to poke around for inspiration, which is about as close as I’m probably going to get in Manhattan to a summer on the farm.
I’ve learned a lot.
As I gasped a couple weeks ago, I didn’t even realize the New York grew such great apricots, or that their season is so long.
I’d always associated prune plums with late August and early September, but they’ve been out for weeks now.
And, most excitingly for me, I always thought of strawberries as a June thing — they come early, leave quickly, and are often good but rarely transcendent.
So, it’s been a treat to learn that the best strawberries, the tiny wild ones, show up later in the summer and are, as far as I’m concerned, the platonic ideal of what a strawberry should be — sweet, delicate and fragrant, with no two exactly alike.
It also means that we’ve been on a berries-and-cream kick for dessert this past month.
I like that we’re having a bowl of berries each night; my son likes that we’re having a bowl of whipped cream; my husband just likes that we’re having dessert.
Everybody wins.
But I had another idea; I wanted more.
Which brings us back to the beginning — this is where all the trouble begins.
Though hear me out: If there could be anything better to me than strawberries and tangy brown sugar softly whipped cream, it would unquestionably be those two things with bits of cookies on top, graham crackers, specifically.
I’m definitely on a crumb kick this summer; once I realized I could separate crumble toppings from fruit crisps and coffee cakes, store them in a jar for weeks so to apply them wherever I wished, whenever the craving struck, I went down a streusel-scattered rabbit hole.
There have been buttery cinnamon crumbles, pecan sandies crumbles and now this: honey and brown sugar-scented graham cracker crumbs.
They’re ridiculously easy to make.
They’re also ridiculously easy to eat.
And although you could argue that strawberries and cream need no improvement, I find it impossible to believe that these don’t pull it off.
I am ashamed to admit that I have been quietly bigoted against cobblers for as long as I can remember, the dessert that is, not those dudes that save my shoes from NYC sidewalks.
And like so many other baseless biases, my issues were not hinged on actually trying one, but an assumption that there could be nothing good about them.
I mean, biscuits and fruit?
Biscuits?
Why on earth would anyone want to bake a fruit dessert with biscuits on top when they could have thick crumbles, granola-like crisps and don’t even get me started on buckles, clafoutis, grunts, slumps, pandowdys and brown bettys, drool.
Biscuits are for salty butter and barbecue and fried chicken, thank you very much.
Well, I am glad I have gotten over my issues, and no surprise here really, it came in the form of an old recipe I found from my current dessert guru fixation, Claudia Fleming.
This is the cobbler that could challenge any cobbler-biased ways, and should you already be smitten with them, do know that this might be the best darn baked fruit dessert I’ve ever baked.
The biscuit-like topping is amazing — cakey but still light and crisp, flavorful and rich.
The rhubarb is tart but softened by the scrape from a fresh vanilla bean and the scent when you let all of this simmer together in your new oven is perfection — and was the most delicious way to break in our new oven.
It’s a funny thing about rhubarb, by the way.
I’d never even tried it before two years ago but now everywhere I turn, it’s rhubarb this and that.
But I fell for it quickly.
First of all, it’s one of the few seasonal fruits around right now, so it’s great to know a few good ways to use it.
Second of all, it’s pink.
Okay, fine maybe you don’t buy fruit just because it’s a pretty, pearly color but if you were going to make an exception, rhubarb is a great place to start.
Finally, it’s tart but it bakes down into something soft and mellow pretty quickly, and you control how sweet it gets.
Once I realized that, it became my favorite fruit to bake.
Rhubarb, previously: Almond Cake with Strawberry Rhubarb Compote, Strawberry Rhubarb Crumble, Strawberry Rhubarb Pecan Loaf, Strawberry Rhubarb Pie and Big Crumb Coffee Cake, with a rhubarb filling.
Mother’s Day Brunch?
This is the first mother’s day in eons we’re not having a brunch at our place, namely because we’re (still) not fully unpacked and a certain table (yes, a table!
like, just to eat on!) we ordered in April doesn’t get here for another month.
But there are still many, many recipes in the archives to hopefully inspire you if you’re hosting or cooking for one of your own.
This page rounds them all up.
Enjoy!
My son’s favorite game in the whole world is Let’s Play With The Other Baby!
You Know, The One We Keep In The Mirror.
We bring him over to this giant mirror in the hallway and he goes berserk, he paws at the “other” baby, kicks his legs, squeals and laughs.
It cracks us up too.
Babies: they’re so cute when they’re kinda confused!
It took us a few weeks to realize how sad this game actually is.
My little monkey is so outgoing and eager to make friends that he’ll play with an imaginary baby that lives in the mirror to get his fix.
Perhaps, we realized, hanging our heads in the shame of being the worst parents, ever, it is time for him to meet some other babies his age that he can paw and squeal at in person and they can hopefully paw and squeal back.
But, of course, this isn’t a story about Jacob’s first playdate, it’s about what I made for breakfast.
Or more accurately, what I didn’t make: baked eggs and busy stratas and quiche and baked French toast and winter fruit salads and anything involving jam on bread or plates and forks.
Because remember the part about the two infants?
You’d be amazed at how ineffective four whole sets of adult hands are at keeping two teeny tiny infants out of harm’s way.
Thus when I spun the wheel of the Things I Want To Cook list and breakfast pizza came up, I knew it would be perfect for eating with one hand while fishing out a piece of Oh God, What Is That In Your Mouth?
with the other.
I was a little dubious about the intersection of mozzarella and eggs — I had a very awful omelet with that combo, plus basil, a few years ago — and I was also convinced that the eggs would roll right off the crust but ended up finding this pizza absolutely, utterly perfect in every way.
The recipe is from The Big Sur Bakery in a treesy nature-loving part of the country I can barely wrap my head around right now, having spent almost the entirety of this last year in this concrete jungle and its suburban counterparts.
I digress.
The pizza is cheesy without being excessively so and somehow, that baked bacon/egg/melted pile doesn’t even feel heavy with all of those fresh herbs and mild onions on top.
Plus, the pizza has this kind of grab-and-go, low-key vibe that is perfect for weather that demands you don’t idle long inside.
Hooray for that!
The internet might be loaded with a ga-jillion recipes, but finding the great ones can still be a little bit of a needle in a haystack.
My favorite way to find new recipes is to ask a random person what their cult favorites are.
Bonus points if they claim to hate cooking, because these are the people who are only going to be excited for dishes that work with airtight reliability that are unquestionably worth your time.
I have found so many gems this way; Marion Burros’s Purple Plum Torte (which, if you have not made yet, shut this browser tab and get to it, please), Cook Country’s Chicken and Dumplings, Jeremiah Tower’s Raspberry Brown Sugar Gratin, this crazy simple beef braise and Ina Garten’s Lemon Cake.
(If you ask me about mine, I might also up this curious tuna salad from the New York Times Magazine, this zucchini and almond saute).
In more recent memory, it’s from asking around that I learned a lot people have a very deep fondness for a raw tomato sauce for a 2006 issue of the late Gourmet Magazine.
I, however, had my doubts.
I am very particular about pasta; I want not too much sauce and I want it to be slurped up by very thirsty al dente pasta with a splash of reserved cooking water in the last minute before you eat it, so that they become as one.
I couldn’t imagine raw tomato sauce being anything but slippery, wet and probably nothing you’d see in Italy, right?
But then two things happened.
First, I realized that having a new baby rather severely limits that time you might spend blanching, peeling and milling fresh tomatoes for your yearly batch of your favorite sauce, no matter how good the tomatoes have been this summer.
And then, two weeks ago, one of my prime authorities on All Things Italian, or at least Roman and sometimes Sicilian, Rachel Roddy, whom I am impatiently tapping my foot for the US release of her book, shared a photo of a raw tomato sauce on pasta that was clearly eaten somewhere in Italy.
The suggested topping of grated ricotta salata was an a-ha moment for me, and exactly what I realized the recipe — which suggests serving the sauce with Parmesan — might be missing.
The sharp and almost pickled creaminess of ricotta salata seemed the perfect contrast to this bowl of crudo.
And so on Sunday, over the course of 6-plus stopped-and-started-and-stopped-again hours because that’s about how long it takes me to do the quickest of anything these days, we made it happen and whether or not you’re juggling a newborn, a bigger kid, a glut of tomatoes, or maybe that summer-specific cooking ennui when you want to eat all of the delicious produce but not actually have to stand at a stove for more than 5 minutes to do so, we quickly declared this the ultimate low-effort dinner.
It is tomatoes in nearly their purest form, naturally sweet and faintly tangy, then garlic-kissed and tangled with fresh basil and the wispiest strands into everything I want in a late-August meal.
Oh, and the leftovers aren’t too bad either which means tonight’s dinner is already sorted too.
That’s what I call a cooking victory lap.
I’m so torn today, people.
I’m trying to maintain that whole stiff upper lip thing because complaining that waah, my shoulder hurts more, and boo, the bruises are getting uglier and also, my left foot is mysteriously swollen, isn’t going to solve anything.
I mean, bitching and moaning?
I hear there’s a real shortage of that on the internet.
On the other hand, sometimes just the smallest amount of venting — petty as it may be — is all it takes so simply get over oneself.
I mean, I fell down the stairs, did I think the next couple weeks were going to be a cinch?
Like, duh.
But since I’ve already slipped into my less-savory side for the moment, can I mention the big purchase Alex and I made last week?
The thing I’ve been wanting forever and finally managed to justify the expense?
That thing would be ice skates.
I think they’ll arrive today.
Raise your hand if you think I should go ice-skating with a bruised shin and my dominant-side shoulder in a sling.
Hello?
Anybody?
So there’s that, too.
(But its sweet the way everybody is trying to protect me from myself.)
I probably didn’t help my spirits by trying to compose a recipe last night not written for the one-handed.
I had to call in the troops to get stuff chopped, and even when said troop left for his volleyball game, I was still up shit’s creek, quite close to coming back to it another day.
Fortunately, the work paid off when I realized you only need about two fingers of one hand to gobble up these numbers.
I think they’d make an ideal Thanksgiving appetizer.
I made the stuffed mushrooms for two reasons: one, I just happened to have almost all of the ingredients, except, notably, the mushrooms in the fridge and wanted to use them up but two, I decided it was time for a little antidote to this season of excess.
Don’t get me wrong, I savor a sweet potato gratin and cornbread chorizo stuffing as much as the next person with taste buds, but isn’t it nice once in a while to have an appetizer not oozing with excess or lacking interest because you reined it in?
[Seeing as it is going to be many weeks before I can down-dog or, shudder, shoulder-stand again, such regimented principles are high on my mind.]
I actually cooked these the first time almost two years ago, but realized quickly the recipe needed a few alterations.
A quick pre-baking of the empty tops allows much of their liquid to drain out, saving the end-product from sogginess, and the addition of some extra shallot and a clove or two of garlic gives the flavor the little oomph it needs.
Alex would like it to be noted that he feels a crumbled strip or two of bacon would really perfect them, but I didn’t see the absence of pork products mitigating his enjoyment of them.
You gotta love the way that boy thinks, though, but I’ll leave it up to you what you jack up the flavors with.
For you spice mavens, I’ll bet a pinch of cayenne could also make these sing.
To wrap up this woe-is-me moment, it has thankfully passed for now.
In fact, more than passed, I think I might actually be (oh my) leaving the apartment tonight to do something fun.
It’s been too long.
	On the kind of clear-skied, warm summer evening when people without sleepless, feverish babies to tend to were drinking beers outside and grilling on rooftop decks, we stayed in last night and, for once, did not feel the eensiest bit jealous.
We were eating ribs for dinner and we hadn’t even needed to leave our apartment to get them.
I never knew I could make ribs in the oven.
I hadn’t even considered it.
Ribs were the jurisdiction of trophy-winning Southeastern barbecue gurus, with trademarked rubs and secret mops.
They were my friend Molly’s thing, and so we left them to her even though our summer has been woefully short of them since she left us for the mountains again, sniffle.
They were not the “thing” of New Yorkers who live in small balcony-less apartments with smaller ovens and absolutely no barbecue tradition or rib religion to draw from, but Harold McGee changed all that.
I am giving him a standing ovation as we speak.
McGee found that he preferred ribs cooked in an indoor oven over an outdoor grill and chalked the it up to real estate: there wasn’t enough surface area for large amounts of ribs (estimating 5 pounds for 4 people, or “a couple hundred square inches” of ribs) to keep the cooking temperature even on most home grills.
In an oven, he could cook ribs gently and evenly for many hours.
And it turned out, so could I.
Just shy of six hours after I put them in the oven, these ribs were everything people standing over grills for hours hope them to be: falling-off-the-bone tender, with deeply caramelized crusty edges.
We spilled the juices into a saucepan and reduced them until they were a syrupy, intensely flavored sauce and draped it over the ribs and served them with slaw and some porch swings.
And sure, we were inside watching Jersey Shore Pillars of the Earth and not out gallivanting but really, the only thing missing was the ruckus.
It’s not exactly news that I am obsessed with artichokes.
Heck, I even decorated this site so that it would never clash my favorite food.
(Honey, the living room is next.) So, the fact that it took me almost ten days from the moment I first saw an artichoke ravioli recipe in January’s Gourmet to make is really only testament to the fact that I’ve spent more time this month swatting Resolutes off my elliptical trainer and lazily ordering dumplings for dinner in the New Year than involving myself in multi-hour recipes.
But fear not, that all fixed itself last night as my husband had to work and I took that as an excuse not to.
I found this second attempt at making pasta (Does gnocchi count?
Because although that would make three, it was a mess best forgotten.) ten-thousand times easier, possibly because you whirled everything in the food processor and it was done in five seconds, no kneading whatsoever.
The recipe suggests you let it sit for an hour to let the glutens relax, which I think is brilliant; it’s also a perfect chunk of time to get everything else ready.
This was my first time using frozen artichokes and on a scale of embodying the artichoke’s awesomeness, I’d put them squarely above the canned kind but of course below fresh.
However, their lack of expense and labor involved should be duly noted.
I parted from the recipe the first time when I saw that it wanted you to reserve a good lot of the artichoke mixture (well more than half) for the sauce and I thought the filling looking sparse, so I used the remainder to make more filling.
I parted from the recipe a second time when it suggested that you use round cookie cutters to make the ravioli, and I realized that it would take far more precise measuring to get all the mounds so perfectly spaced than I was in the mood for, opting instead to use my new pastry wheel to make square-ish ones (they’re actually trapezoid-ish un-parallelograms, but I love them just the same).
I parted with the recipe a third and final time when I was unable to use the remaining pasta dough a second time, it being too tough from flour to roll very thin.
(Did I mention that lacking a pasta wheel, I rolled it out by hand?
Really, not hard at all to get thin.) 
I found it really, really difficult to get all of the air bubbles out of the ravioli, which made them all float half-in/half-out of the water when I tried to boil them, making them unwieldy to cook.
I consulted the Italian cooking know-all where I get my lunch and he assured me that this happens even to experts, and the only way to avoid air bubbles is to use one of these do-hickeys I’d earlier and wrongly dismissed as one of those gimmicky things you’d buy if your kitchen was more than 80 square feet.
He also said that the best way to get floating pasta to stay submerged is to cover it with a damp towel.
Brilliant, eh?
I will remember to consult him earlier next time.
Sharing Luisa’s outrage over January recipes which include fresh tomatoes, but stuck in some ridiculous need to follow a recipe to the letter — er, except those three letters above — the first time I make it, I obliged but those pale pink-centered things looked so pathetic in the pan, I added a squeeze of tomato paste and seasoning.
It was surprisingly good in the end; along with the cream, it was the perfect weightless topping for these delightfully grown-up ravioli.
The parsley, lemon juice and buttery onions in the filling snuggle nicely around the artichokes bittersweet flavor and cheese was a minority ingredient, an absolute essential for me to eat ravioli.
(Yes, I know not liking cheese-filled things is crazy, but I’ve never feigned to be anything but.) Believe it or not, we had dinner at 8:30 last night, which is remarkably early for us, especially on a night when two hours and an 879-word recipe earlier, our pasta was but a wee pile of flour.
I’m so enchanted by this process, I might even try it again this weekend for a certain television premiere.
Artichoke and Parmesan-stuffed ravioli, just like the ancient Romans ate, right?
My son was served an eviction notice at the 38.5 week mark, which means that as I now approach my 40th week of manufacturing a new human (that, ironically, we will likely spend the next few years threatening to eat) I have unquestionably never been this pregnant before.
I’m beginning to feel a bit like a circus sideshow; I think that most women in my condition simply stay home, what else could explain what a spectacle I must be when I go anywhere?
Yesterday, I had to go up to the hospital to fill out some paperwork, which led to possibly a new world record of awkward conversations in an hour timespan: 
Getting in a cab: “I need to go to the hospital.
I promise, I’m not in labor.”
At the information desk: “Can you tell me how to get to labor and delivery?
No, I’m not in labor.”
To the employee by the elevator, because I cannot retain basic information in my brain these days for more than twenty steps: “Labor and delivery is on which floor again?
No, not for me, I mean, for me, but not today!
Omgdebshutupshutup.”
To the stranger who said “Is today the day?!”: [Something under my breath that need not be repeated.]
..
to say nothing of walking into Labor & Delivery, but not to stay.
(Although, believe me, I thought about camping out.
I mean, being arrested for civil disobedience would be such a great story for my future momoir!)
So, if you came here today, hoping for some baby toes or at least some sign that I’ve moved onto a new subject matter, I’m sorry to disappoint.
But, I did make us some scones, and they, I hope, will not.
One of my favorite ways to cook with blueberries is to overdo it to the point of making a great big mess.
Remember this Blueberry Crumb Cake from last summer?
I maintain that the magic of it is in the proportions — something like 2 cups of batter to nearly 3 cups of blueberries.
(You’re welcome.) I’ve never much cared for blueberries raw, but buried in a nest of butter, sugar and flour threaded with lemon zest and baked until collapsed and leaking purple juices everywhere, they are unquestionably my happy place.
I didn’t get these right the first time.
They were too cakey, to soft.
Making a sturdier, less rich scone with whole wheat flour and milk instead of cream (it’s like I’m on a diet — ha) worked in the blueberries favor, and has served the additional benefit of stocking our freezer with something delicious yet still vaguely wholesome to bake off later this summer for an easy breakfast.
But I won’t lie, it’s going to be hard to wait that long to have them again.
I hope, if we are going to continue to be good friends, that we can have an implicit understanding that there is no such thing as too many peach recipes.
Not in July, not in August, not in New York, which grows surprisingly good peaches for a Yankee.
And I know that as a writer and food person, I’m supposed to be on the lookout for my crutches, my overused ingredients.
I should probably lay off the tomatoes, the caramelized onions, the feta, Dijon, strawberries, green beans, white beans and butternut squash.
Sheesh, I should show some range!
Maybe I will, you know, after peach season is over.
Because I’m not done with them yet.
I’m not done with summer yet.
Maybe it’s this mild August we’ve been having or, I confess, the not-supposed-to-be-but-kinda-has-been fun of having a husband out of a job for the last few months, but once you become a summer person, it’s hard to react with anything but venom when you spy apples and butternut squash at the farmer’s market before Labor Day, as I did this week.
How gauche!
But, you know, September’s not going to be too terrible.
School resumes, which is pretty awesome if you’re three-going-on-four, we’ll all be back to the grind (sigh/yay) and oh, there’s this little trip I’m taking across the pond for a UK book tour.
Okay, it’s not little.
It’s going to be epic.
The Smitten Kitchen Cookbook came out in the UK in February, but at the time, I was still book tour-ing over here so it took some time to schedule it.
I think it will be worth the wait.
I so hope we finally get to meet.
I’ve listed the dates and towns that have been scheduled thus far on the Events page but more are still being added.
(Sadly, the first London event sold out before I got to tell you about it, which was really rude, I know.
But we are in the process of nailing down the details for another!
Please don’t be mad.) [The Smitten Kitchen Cookbook UK Book Tour]
Anyway, it seems only fitting to usher in this announcement with a little keeper of a recipe from the incredible UK food writer, Nigel Slater, who knows his way around baked fruit.
This recipe hails from his 2012 book, Ripe, and just about everyone made it before I finally came around it to as I’d been suspicious of its short ingredient list.
It’s my loss.
I mean, does it involve peaches?
Does it involve a crisp topping?
I should have been all over that.
But wait, this isn’t just another peach crisp.
You see, the peaches are the crisp.
A mound of crumbly buttery almond and sugar topping is patted into halved peach bellies, then spread out over their cut sides.
Maybe you brush the peaches with bourbon or rum first, if that’s your thing?
It can be our little secret.
This crisp, so unlike our last one, is insanely simple.
There’s no brown sugar, no flour, no cinnamon or salt.
There isn’t supposed to be any oats either, but I just can’t leave well enough alone.
Nevertheless, what you need to do is get this recipe in your back pocket right this second.
It should be easy enough to memorize and although the baking time is slightly longer than it would be with a chopped fruit crisp, in that longer time magical things happen, like the sugar melts against the almonds and bubbles into the peach juices to form an almost chewy peach almond caramel brittle on top.
Chewy peach almond caramel brittle.
What are you still doing reading this?
[2018 Update: I’d never have seen it coming in 2008, but this recipe has become a star of our meal routine, especially in the summer, when we can grill the chicken, or when we are coming off week of heavier foods.
The kids like crunchy lettuce and grilled chicken; throwing in croutons seals the deal.
We often put it out unassembled so they can make their own bowls.
So, I’ve given it a refresh with tighter recipes and more details.]
It has been almost a year since I told you that I don’t like boneless, skinless chicken cutlets, I never had and I never would.
Furthermore, I did not understand the American obsession with them (in sandwiches!
on pizza!
in pasta!
on salad!
in 54-packs at Costco!).
“They have the texture and excitement of pressed sawdust,” I believe were my exact words, and even though I knew I was in a distinct minority on this, I knew I couldn’t rest soundly until I got it off my chest.
But The People wouldn’t let it go.
“You must try brining,” they whispered into my inbox, “brining is much better,” they said in the comments, “brining will change you life,” one went as far as to say, at which point I stopped listening entirely.
Why should I have to work so hard to make something taste good?
Obviously, it is not inherently tasty, or it wouldn’t require all of these extra steps and seasonings.
Pressed sawdust, I said; case closed.
I know what you’re thinking right now: Poor Alex.
Does he really have to put up with this every single day?
Didn’t he, like, live on chicken cutlets when he was single?
Can’t she cut them a little slack?
And you’d be right: I really am impossible.
But if we flash forward to last week’s pork chops, you’ll notice a little step that got squeezed quietly in there: the b-word.
The other one.
And what it resulted in were the juiciest pork chops I have ever eaten; I could scarcely believe my mouth, and soon enough, there I was, offering to try the same with chicken cutlets.
To be chopped into a salad.
As if there were not two things I detest more.
Caesar salads are a perfect example of one of those items that always disappoint me when I order them somewhere, so I decided to take them into my own hands a few years ago, my very serious hands.
I make the dressing and croutons, I select only the best-looking leaves of Romaine heart, I freshly grate the best Parmesan we have on hand, all the while Alex baffles that a salad his deli can put together in one minute takes me so long.
With my recently piqued interest in well-rounded meals, I’ve been looking for a protein to add to it.
I tried a chopped hardboiled egg last week but, eh, it just didn’t work for me, which brings us back around to that brined cutlet.
We soaked two chicken cutlets in a half-batch of brine for 30 minutes, and seasoned them before frying them in a pan, only one of the dryest of all dry preparations and seriously?
Have you waited long enough for me to tell you this?
Brining is a whole new world.
I never knew that chicken could be so juicy.
However, I’m not going to lie–moisture is not flavor, and these still did not have the flavor profile of darker meat.
But it was a start, and a very promising one at that.
I mentioned a couple weeks ago that we had plans to flee this so-called winter we’re having in New York and jet to a place where it’s always summer.
It was dreadfully boring, by the way, all silky white sand that was cool under your bare feet, blazing aqua waters that you could walk a full city block into before you were in deeper than your waist and oh so quiet (rumor has it that they don’t even let these on the island!).
Blissfully, there was nothing to do but read books, stare at the horizon and not think about life for a while.
The most profound conversation we had in three days was whether a spot out on the water where the color slipped from a piercing aquamarine to a deeper cerulean to was due to a change of depth, or just the cast shadow of a cloud.
The shadow of a cloud.
Man, times were tough.
What I forgot to mention is that we weren’t bringing our son with us.
Lest you think I’m immune to Mom Guilt — au contraire, it is the very pitch to which my life is auto-tuned, the backbone, nay, doctrine of my existence, governing all decisions from “Is that my son picking up a stray cheddar bunny from the seat of a random stroller and do I really have to stop him?” to whether or not I should admit that I was late to call yesterday because I was, in actuality, reading with my eyes shut for the 9th time that afternoon.
Ahem, so, Mom Guilt in full swing, I decided to leave something special — petite apple crisps — in the fridge that he could have as a treat on the days I’d be away.
Alas, the longer I am a mom, the harder it is for me to not question everything.
Why all that butter?
I bet he’d like it just as much with a healthful oil!
Why all that refined sugar and flour?
I know it could be endlessly delicious without it.
I haven’t yet reached the Hiding Spinach in the Brownies level of madness and with all due respect, I hope I never do as spinach and brownies are too wonderful apart to mash them into something greater than neither of their parts, and lie to a child at the same time, oh look at that, I’ve digressed again.
So, yes, stopping short of what I call the spinach-in-the-brownies line in the (powdery Caribbean) sand, I made him some tiny multigrain apple crisps.
There’s brown sugar, and a little bit of butter.
Cinnamon and a solid crumb-to-fruit (by solid, I mean “high”) ratio.
But there are also oats a-plenty and oat flour, whole wheat flour and almond meal.
And it’s good enough that we’ve already stolen one two, I mean, made a second batch.
You might want to make a habit out of them, too.
If you go to Mexico City and leave without a pressing, relentless craving for melon, or really just about any fruit, sprinkled with tajín (salsa en polva), a branded seasoning powder comprised of chiles, lime and salt, I think you need to go back because you did it wrong.
It feels melodramatic to call this intersection of tangy spice and juicy fruit a national dish, but the spice blend is a staple on tables and at street vendors all over Mexico, and I dare say more popular than ketchup is here.
If you go to someone’s home and they have a bottle of tajin in their cabinet, it’s usually right up front and there’s a spare somewhere near because it would be unfathomable to run out.
If asked, the person will probably tell you that they had it once over melon, mango, pineapple or cucumbers one time, or maybe in a michelada and they could never eat it another way again.
I hope you consider that a warning.
Although in Mexico it’s a street snack, as unfussy as can be, because I’m a no-fun person who hates eating standing up, I’ve been trying to figure out how to make a salad of it for some time and finally figured it out.
Here, the lime juice is squeezed fresh, the chili powder is sprinkled to taste, the salt is coarse and I add other accents — roasted pepitas, crumbled cotija and chopped cilantro.
It works as part a brunch spread (I think all brunch spread need more salad), with some sort of taco-centric meal or as the heat wave salad of my dreams.
Are there equivalent seasonings in other countries?
In Indian cooking, there’s chaat masala, a sour spice I cannot get enough of.
Li hing is a powdered format of Chinese dried plum that’s popular in Hawaii.
I tried to come up with a US approximation of it but came up blank.
I’m asking only partially out of culinary curiosity and mostly because I’m going to need one of each, stat.
Even haiku-writing food bloggers get in ruts.
We fall back on our old crutches–overused commas and em-dashes.
We get lazy with our descriptions, referring to too many things as “awakening,” “a revelation,” “succulent,” and/or “meltingly tender.” Cute turns twee as growing things become “veggies” and delicious is replaced with “yummy.” And find that all of our posts follow the same predictable pattern–there was a previous belief, an eye-opener, a tried-it-at-home and a happily-ever-after with a recipe on top.
Fine, I’m just talking about myself, but how am I to grow without owning up to my bad habits?
Why air this dirty laundry today?
Because I was about to start this entry with “it started out so innocently” but then the five-alarm went off in my head: No.
Stop.
Alert!
Code Red!
Backspace!
So, although it did, let’s just pretend you know that already.
And let us talk about The Tart That Started It All instead.
Madeleine is a new bakery that I walk by on my way home from work, a refreshing change from the All Cupcakes All The Time that dominates New York bakery scene these days.
I prefer a macaron or wee French tart any day over a bland cake with teeth-achingly sweet frosting (though my resolve is known to weaken if that frosting is, say, pink).
A few weeks ago, I picked up a small cherry tartlet for Alex and I to split, the type I see often at pastry shops but rarely try and was bowled over to learn the stuff between the cherries tasted exactly like marzipan, and if anyone remembers back this long, they will know that I looove me some marzipan.
Of course, since I had only moderate success with my first marzipan endeavor, I was convinced that such a tart would be very difficult to make, but boy, was I wrong.
If possible, it is even easier than a fresh berry tart with pastry cream, and although I wouldn’t dare play favorites, I do expect that my next several tart endeavors will have a ground almond padding around the bruleed fruit.
In this case, the fruit was plums but as the apples and pears roll in, you better believe they’ll be next in line.
Oh, and by the way?
It never starts innocently.
What fun would that be?
On Serious Eats: 5 Ways To Green Up Your Kitchen with no shame or mockery!
Aaargh!
Despite apparently moving this here Kitchen to a bigger server last week, this site, as some have noticed, has been up and down and up and down for the last couple weeks.
Some of the problems have been on the specific server itself, some–like yesterday and today–have been Dreamhost network-wide.
Nonetheless, I’ve had enough and will be shopping for a more reliable hosting service next week.
Harrumph!
Napa, Baby: Tomorrow morning, off we go!
I am hoping to depart from the usual text-heavy nature of posts and slap some pictures and notes up here throughout the weekend.
I really want you to see everything as immediately as we get to, because really, it’s the least you deserve for sending us on this awesome trip.
However, if we’re too busy or exhausted, I have Jocelyn and her E-Z Bake Oven on stand-by.
You have no idea how much she wants to bake you cookies.
Me and strawberries are going through the wringer this week.
It started with a large, plank-like shortcake with cream cheese, sour cream and a buttered center.
It was a dud, an all-caps level DUD.
I should have known better than to try a recipe from a dubious source, and also to mess with a perfect thing.
Next came a strawberry-striped tweak on my favorite crumb cake, except it didn’t really stripe and when released from the pan, stood briefly on the counter, sighed then slumped wobbily to the side.
Filed under: delicious dud hanging out in the freezer, waiting for the next barbecue invitation.
Third came a [we’ll talk about it later] which I was attempting for the [that too] and it is all sorts of magically tasty if you can look back the large crater in the middle, as if strawberry filling had recently erupted from within it.
Filed under: another delicious disaster and lordy, my freezer is getting full.
Recipe four was tasty, but I’m debating whether it’s worth burdening your time to discuss; I will ponder this over my next serving but recipe five, recipe five is the real reason we’re here today.
It started with an apple brown betty, and my recent realization that I have never tried one.
Butter + crumbs + sugar = what is wrong with me?
Obvious that.
Then I found a link I’d bookmarked eons ago to tiny brown bettys, molded in muffin tins, a web recipe from the late Gourmet Magazine.
[Moment of silence.] And where it said “good-quality sandwich bread”, I read “Wonder Bread” because I can get it at the bodega.
Where it said, “Gala or Fuji apples”, I read “South Jersey strawberries” because I can’t stop buying them.
Where it said, “light brown sugar and cinnamon”, I read “dark and lemon zest” and I took “unsalted butter, melted” to mean “browned butter”.
Because that’s what I always do.
And I’ve never regretted it.
And so on round five of Something Early Summery That Will Make You More Welcome Anywhere You Go This Weekend, I finally have something to file within the category.
If those rhubarb tarts were “rustic”, these are, um, “primitive” — white bread for crusts, bread crumbs for thickener, dark brown sugar for glue and browned nearly to the point of burning oops butter that made us happy with every bite.
Need another reason to make these?
The baby, given his very first fingertip taste of whipped cream, proceeded to lunge with a force and ability to crawl forward heretofore unseen, at the plate of dessert.
I like to believe that these bettys can have that effect on anyone.
Two weeks from today, my second cookbook, Smitten Kitchen Every Day: Triumphant & Unfussy New Favorites will be leaving warehouses* to reach bookstores or perhaps your front door (if you’ve preordered the book) and I cannot believe it’s so close now.
Last month, I shared the trailer for the book and told you all about the book tour that begins the day the book comes out and I promised additional cities would be added.
Today is the day!
The book tour page — see it in full right here, or click on the image below — now includes Minneapolis, Atlanta, Montreal, Kansas City, Denver, Boulder, Tulsa, Maplewood NJ and an additional book signing in New York City, in addition to the events already planned in Boston, Toronto, Chicago, Philadelphia, Washington DC, Dallas, Austin, Houston, Vancouver, Seattle, Portland, San Francisco, Santa Cruz, and Los Angeles.
The book launch will be right here in New York City two weeks from tonight at Barnes & Noble Union Square.
Amanda Hesser of Food52, New York Times, and James Beard Award-winning fame and I will chat, and a book signing will follow.
Prepare to spot all sorts of Smitten Kitchen Family Members, eager to share stories about what a terrible cook I was as a kid.
Will you come say hi?
I hope you do.
I hope we get to hang out.
Is the book tour not coming to your town?
I have you covered.
No, I have not figured out how to clone myself (we all know I’d just make the clone do the dishes anyway) but even better, you can pre-order a signed cookbook inscribed any way you wish through The Strand, a beloved bookstore in my neighborhood.
I am inscribing these books next week, so if you’d like yours to go out with the other preorders, with the goal of arriving when the book is released, please please please order before 10/16?
I will still be delighted to sign all other orders that come in, but it will be when I can stop by between book tour stops.
Pre-Order A Custom Inscribed Cookbook
Finally, just a tiny update: The 92Y event with David Lebovitz had been listed as sold out but they moved it to a bigger room and now it is not.
(Yay.) 
* If you follow @smittenkitchen Instagram Stories, you might know I flew down to Maryland to personally visit them in their temporary home a week and a half ago.
Now, about that Chocolate Olive Oil Cake.
A year or so ago, I got really obsessed with the idea of making a chocolate olive oil cake for fall.
Why is it a fall and not a spring or summer cake?
I cannot answer this.
I can only tell you that I made one I’d read a lot about but ended up underwhelmed.
I’ve been asked before what I do when I bake something that comes out all wrong and I think it’s important that I eradicate any thread of an esteemed opinion you might have left for me with this: I have a tantrum.
I stomp out of the kitchen in a huff, or at least the mental equivalent of it, and I’m crabby and cranky and resent the recipe that should have been better and the loss of time I could have been doing anything else.
(Like cleaning out my closet!) (Let’s pretend I wouldn’t make 100 other cakes before getting around to it.) When I get past that, I rarely take another stab at it again the next day; we need some space.
It’s usually “later,” i.e.
whenever the craving strikes again or I think I have a fresh way to go about it.
This time it took a year and it was a little of both.
The craving arrived because it was fall, which again, I cannot explain but it might have something to do with the subtle, earthier quality olive oil imparts in chocolate, especially when flecked with sea salt.
It feels fall-ish, even if the weather outside is defiantly summer-ish.
Separately, someone told me about his family’s go-to chocolate cake that’s made for every birthday that’s plush and perfect and never fails.
The recipe had the title Wacky Cake on it.
I had never heard of a wacky cake.
It turns out I’m among the few.
Wacky Cake — a.k.a.
“Cockeyed Cake,” if you’re a Peg Bracken fan, which really, who is not, or Depression Cake — is a single-layer chocolate cake that’s has 7 ingredients, all of which are in your kitchen right now, and takes 5 minutes to put together.
Some versions are even mixed in the baking pan.
I am completely burying the lede here, but it’s also vegan, as in, butter and milk-free and — this is the crazy part — egg-free as well, no flax eggs or canned bean liquid required.
The chocolate glaze here is not traditional, but I couldn’t resist; it too is vegan if you use dairy-free chocolate chips.
Typically, it’s fairly thin and the proportion of cocoa powder to flour is relatively low; it yields a brown cake, but not one chocolaty enough to please the likes of me.
I increased the proportions of the cake to make it taller and tweaked the cocoa to be more dominant and ended up with a nearly pitch-black cake.
Typically, any oil is used but I found in this cake the perfect chance to realize my chocolate olive oil cake dreams in a cake I think we should all stop what we are doing and make right now.
Because if there are people out there whose Tuesdays are not improved by a thick slice of perfect chocolate cake, well, I haven’t met any.
Several years ago, because we didn’t have a kid yet, didn’t know about things like school break schedules and figured midway through February was as good of a time to escape the snow as any, we decided to get away to someplace warm and winter-free during Presidents’ Day week.
We found ourselves smack dab in the middle of a beach resort that had to have easily been 75% children, and the kind that were at that time my worst nightmare of what kids could be [insert yours here, then multiply it as far as you can see] and we decided to both never have kids and never ever go away on Presidents’ Week again.
Flash forward seven or so years and last week we went to probably one of the most kid-centric, kid-mobbed resorts* one can go to on the most kid-centric and kid-mobbed week of the year and it was the best thing, ever.
Previous to last week, I wouldn’t say we’ve exactly mastered the art of family vacations.
Sure, we always have fun together but it often either feels like we’re either someplace exciting for adults but less so for little kid, or someplace awesome for a little kid but it feels more like this for the adults.
This may not be for everyone, but at least for now, the resolution turned out to be a place where us grownups could lay on the beach, reading books, napping, and being total slackers for most of the day while the kid attended a day camp with everything from pony rides to water slides, trapeze school and circus training and also a pirate-themed treasure hunt for … underwear which if you’ve ever been around 4 and 5 year-olds, know was the greatest.
We’d retrieve our kid, sticky with ice cream, chocolate pastries and sugar cereals from his mid-afternoon goûter and then play on the beach or in the pool for a couple hours before dinner, stories, bed and everybody won.
Everyone had an awesome vacation.
Thank goodness we’re not doing anything in the coming months that would upset the chances of repeating this bliss next year!
Alas, the fridge didn’t fill itself while we were away (technology, can you get on that?) and we pretty much had a family lazy-off yesterday, in which we tried to see how long we could go on pre-vacation remains before one of us caved and went to the store.
It turned out — you know, along with some Sunday night soup dumplings — all day, if you can scrounge a few staples together.
Before vacation, when I was deep in my 2nd Trimester Carb Immersion Plan, I fell in love on sight alone with a dish called Rhonda’s Spaghetti with Fried Eggs with Pangritata for One on Food52.
I mean, how could I not, as it basically contained all of my trigger foods: pasta, bread and my ongoing obsession that I find as many excuses as I can to work into dishes, the crispy egg.
Pangrattato translates from Italian as grated bread, referring to breadcrumbs themselves, but in dishes, it’s often known to as the poor man’s Parmesan because when you take that stale bread and lightly toast in in olive oil, herbs and seasonings — anything from just salt and pepper to garlic and anchovies, lemon zest and capers or olives — it adds remarkable texture and complex flavor to pasta without the expense of Parmesan.
These crumbs it would be equally welcome to as a topping for canned fish, steamed mussels, warm vegetable salads, sautéed greens, or even on eggs without the pasta.
We loved the crunch throughout our tangles of al dente lunchtime spaghetti, and the fried egg broken up on top, a nod to Rhonda’s version, adds a gorgeous richness that, well… I’ll be repeating in about one hour.
* as always on this site, this is not a sponsored or paid post, vacation, opinion, etc.
all costs of vacation absorbed by author, with a grimace 
Among the great Ashkenazi soul food traditions — bagels, lox, chicken noodle soup, challah, brisket and its cousins, pastrami and corned beef — few are more deeply rooted in the communal psyche than kugels, or starch-based puddings that hail from southern Germany.
The word kugel, meaning sphere, globe or ball, originally referred to dumplings dropped over a soup pot, the version baked casserole pans became my people’s favorite, always made in vast quantities, served on Shabbat or holidays in squares and usually shoved in the hands of unsuspecting relatives and guests in disposable foil tins on their way home.
The smart ones know resistance is futile.
While two kinds are considered staples — noodle and potato — outside my family at least, where my mother claims to this day that she married my father mostly to get his family’s noodle kugel recipe, the potato reigns supreme, likely due to its practicality as an easily reheated side dish that complements any meal worth having.
And though everyone agrees on the ingredients (potatoes, onion, eggs and fat, usually schmaltz or rendered chicken fat, of course), and that the top must be browned crisp and the inside must be tender, if you really want to get people started, ask them how to best achieve this and see if any two agree.
An avalanche of eggs (says the food critic Arthur Schwartz), an unholy amount of oil (says nobody who will admit to it), shredding not grinding, grinding not shredding, shredded by hand vs.
shredded by machine (usually an intergenerational dispute), wringing the extra moisture out vs.
“nope, that’s wrong,” fresh from the oven vs.
reheated for best flavor, with matzo meal vs.
no matzo meal… are you exhausted yet?
I could go on and on.
Me?
I call them Lazy Latkes.
As has been well-established over the last nine years on this site, I believe potato pancakes are among the earth’s perfect foods and speak of them with a fervor others reserve for bacon or pizza.
Lacy mops of shredded potato and onion fried until steamy and tender inside and shatteringly crisp outside, you can have your home fries, they’re the only thing I want under my runny eggs, my son wants with applesauce and my husband wants with sour cream and caviar.
And yet, they’re a bit of work, especially because I insist on wringing every droplet of moisture from the potatoes (I’m done when my arms are too tired for another squeeze) and frying them just a few at a time for best quality control.
Potato kugel, the way I make it at least, is fuss-free: no wringing, all the work done in a machine and mixed in one big bowls (usually with my fingers) then piled in a sizzling hot cast-iron skillet (I mean, this is the Smitten Kitchen, after all) and baked until seriously, why aren’t you making this yet?
Of course, there was also cake.
I mean, you didn’t think I’d let my better half’s 35th birthday go by without some homemade, stacked and butter-laden goodness, did you?
Right, I didn’t think so.
Now, no introduction to a birthday cake for Alex would be complete without a brief tour of the cakes from years past, when there has been an Icebox Cake, a Chocolate Caramel Cheesecake, a Brownie Mosaic Cheesecake and the cake that you all liked so much, it broke the server’s back for a harrowing day or two last year, the Chocolate Peanut Butter Cake.
Did you sense a theme or something?
There Will Be Chocolate, Like You Even Needed To Ask.
Alas, after throwing a self-catered party on Saturday night, my cake-baking ambition for Monday was just slightly diminished, not that this cake was any kind of cop-out, just perhaps not the Smith Island Cake riff (like this stunner, but with crushed peanut butter cups between the layers; yes for real) I’d been threatening for months.
Besides, we’d already hit most of Alex’s favorite food groups in years past — Oreos, cheesecake and peanut butter — it was time to move onto another: coffee, and lots of it.
But I didn’t want to make a mocha cake; in those, it always feels like something gets lost in them, like there’s never enough coffee or chocolate flavor.
Instead, I wanted to separate the flavors out: an intensely coffee-soaked layer cake and a dark, fudgy frosting…
Did you hear me tell you that the cake was drenched in a boozy espresso syrup?
How about the part with the deep chocolate frosting that comes together in ten seconds?
No really, why are you still reading?
If you had this in your fridge, you’d be halfway to the kitchen right now to get another slice.
I know I am.
Layer Cake Tips: New to celebration cakes?
Daunted by all of those layers and steps?
Check out my layer cake tips post for a round-up of all of the tricks I’ve picked up over the years.
	With all due respect, I think you’ve been putting cheese on the wrong side of your grilled cheese sandwiches.
Or, at the least, neglecting the better ones, the exteriors.
Wait, hear me out.
It’s basic food math that while cold cheese is good, warm cheese is better.
But if you take that a step further — and if you’re new here, let me tell you: we will always take it a step further — you will agree that melted cheese is better than warm cheese, and the melted cheese that rolls off a piece of sandwich bread and sizzles on a skillet, browning and crisping, is the top of the cheese tower… A place I’d very much like to live.
Do you think a cheese tower might exist somewhere?
Might it be France?
Now I’m picturing an Eiffel Tower made out of cheese and what were we talking about?
Oh right: melted and browned cheese wins, really for the same reason that browned butter trumps regular butter: the fats melt away from the dairy solids and toast them until they’re caramelized and achingly delicious and you forget why you’d ever eat it any other way.
Don’t fight it.
Frico is the official name for it.
It’s usually invoked in the realm of Parmesan-Reggiano, or at least in almost every restaurant since the wildly fric-wild heyday of the 80s and 90s, usually in lacy crisps that garnish soups, salads and the like to remind you that they’re fancy.
They’re not actually fancy, though.
They’re just a pinch of grated cheese, melted in a skillet or on a baking sheet until they bubble, crisp and can be lifted in one lacy disc with a spatula.
And I see no reason they should they should be limited in flavor to Parmesan, or at least not when I’m craving grilled cheese and tomato soup, really the perfect early fall meal.
Here, we frico un-fancily, almost hideously, intentionally instead of accidentally between buttered bread and a hot skillet.
It’s one of these tiny cooking things that you can do to what you were already making, using the same exact ingredients, that makes it infinitely better.
These are my favorite tiny things.
***
I’ve missed you.
I had realized once September hit that it was going to be chaos city in my orbit for a while, but I’d still gotten a bit of cooking done and hoped to find windows to update the site in the midst of it.
You’d think by my third book tour, I’d know better.
Nevertheless, London, which I returned from late Monday night (only to be fully awake again at 3:30 a.m.
because hello, jet lag, and then under the weather since, bah) was otherwise such a treat, in part because it included so many sub-adventures, such as a half weekend in Abergavenny, Wales, an overnight stay at, yes, an Air Force base, a visit to Bath, Ely and Cambridge and oh, I also cooked on an Aga stove on a houseboat (link to come).
It was hardly short on adventure, capped by a weekend visit from Alex, who told our son that he “was going away bring Mommy home,” which totally made my lip quiver.
12 days is a very long trip.
I was there long enough that the cars no longer looked funny to me, or gave me the panic-of-imminent-death that they were on the wrong side of the road.
It was long enough that I came home and asked my son if he wanted porridge for breakfast, but I meant oatmeal.
I’ve lost sight of why we whip cream for desserts, when a fruit crumble is so much better thickly drizzled with it cold and fresh.
I may have called something “brilliant” yesterday, when it really wasn’t.
I’ve always thought that the feeling of being away is increased by the number of times when you’re so caught up in the details of being there (maybe for good stuff like whee, I’m on a boat!
or stuff that’s more amusing in hindsight like being consumed with why you’re stuck on a jammed train or a fully-booked hotel you’re trying to check into at 1 a.m.
can’t find your reservation or have no idea where to transfer rails because what do you have against clear signage, London, what?) and by that standard, the trip felt even longer.
This is wonderful when you’re on a family summer vacation but a little sadder when you’re away from them, and I’m feeling the need to excessively dote on my people now that I’m back, which likely means more home cooking, more soaking up of weekend inspiration, and more new fun ideas to share here.
Everyone wins.
When it is as cruelly cold out as it has been this week, beef bourguignon is one of my favorite things.
If there is anything better than a symphony of onions, carrots, red wine, broth and a scoop of tomato paste simmered for hours, I haven’t met it.
I don’t want to meet it.
I already know my favorite.
Julia Child’s recipe was always my mother’s go-to dish for company and back in the day, the smell of it braising in the oven was enough to get me to reconsider my vegetarianism.
I cheated more than once, ladling the braise broth over egg noodles, and never felt that I wasn’t missing a thing.
In fact, I always argued that most of the things people thought they liked about meat they actually liked about the sauces and braises and spices they were cooked in, which is why I have been dreaming up a vegetable based bourguignon for ages.
But I finally figured out how I wanted to do it on Monday night, and just in time: it’s a freaking icicle out there.
I used the same approach — sauteed onions and carrots, tomato paste, thyme, broth and wine — but swapped out the beef with meaty slices of mushrooms.
I didn’t spare any of the fixings — it was finished with a thickening butter and pearl onions and we ate it over egg noodles.
It was heavenly, warm and comforting and I dare say, the best antidote to this shivering January.
Well, the best antidote that is not a Caribbean island.
Though I guess that goes without saying.
I cannot resist a recipe that promises an odd outcome.
To wit, prior to stumbling upon this curiosity in the wonderful A Boat, A Whale and a Walrus, an assembly of recipes and stories from restaurants on the other side of the country that I am now extra-sad I haven’t been to (yet!
Like maybe in 5 or 18 years or so?), I understood cobblers to be more or less baked fruit topped with a soft cake batter or plush biscuit, while crisps had clusters of oaty and sometimes nutty cookie-like crumbs giving them their namesake texture.
[Let us save comparisons with crumbles, grunts, fools, pandowdys, sonkers, bettys, buckles and slabs for another delicious day.] Crisps were not soft; cobblers were not crisp.
But not this one.
Here, in technique that Renee Erickson, the author and chef, says she was handed down from the original owner of one of her restaurants, The Boat Street Café, a rather simple flour/butter/sugar/milk batter is beaten for longer than any proper cake recipe would usually advocate, spread thinly over unpeeled peaches that have been dressed only with lemon zest and juice — no thickeners, spices or sugar — coated with more sugar and then drizzled with hot water.
In the oven, the batter develops a crisp lid that is as fun to impatiently tap your way through as the best crème brûlée.
It’s also kind of a mess beneath the surface, the glurping, sloshy, summery type.
The peaches are going to slide around until they’ve cooled a bit and thicken up, and you should wait 30 minutes for this to happen or waive any textural complaints.
Sure, you could add thickener, but I’ve never liked the way they muffle the flavor of baked stone fruits.
Because the lid is a bit sweet, this is better with a drizzle of cold cream or dollop of crème fraîche than it would be with the usual scoop of vanilla ice cream or sweetened whipped cream.
Mostly, however, this was a bonafide hit, as should be no surprise, given that it’s late August and the peaches in New York this year are the best I’ve had north of South Carolina and this provides all of the deliciousness of a classic peach pie — sweet collapsed fruit, a flaked buttery lid — with about 1/10 of the work.
 As should not be surprising, my parents have been a little concerned about me since I called them last Friday night and said I’d had a little run-in with the stairs, but I was fine, except I couldn’t really lift my left arm and I’d bumped my head a couple times on the way down but I didn’t really have to go to the emergency room, did I?
Because surely this would all be better in the morning?
Alas, in the ten days since they’d explained to me six different ways ’till Sunday why that was the wrong answer, but spared me the told you so when the diagnosis was dealt, all they have wanted to know is what they can do for me.
You can only tell people “nothing, I’m fine” so many times before they threaten to storm your apartment and cook you dinner — how hard is my life, eh?
— and that pretty much brings us up to tonight.
Except, I am apparently allergic to such fine treatment because when mom said she wanted to make Mexican-spiced chicken cutlets, I said I wanted to make pork riblets instead.
She said she’d make salad but I said there was this miso-carrot dressing I’ve been itching to try.
So, mom said she would make rice — rice,  people — and I said, but we have all these little red potatoes to use up and she finally gave up and just brought cake.
See what you get for trying to do nice things for me?
The cake is amazing.
But I’m not going to tell you about it until tomorrow, because I am certain this entry has not yet amply exemplified what a pain in the ass I can be.
Now, one of the most cardinal, basic rules of dinner parties, and the one I consistently break is that you should never try out recipes for the first time on your guests.
But when those guests are your family and have to love you either way (right now, SantaDad is guffawing) I say go to town on them.
Fortunately, everything worked like a charm.
The cream of wild mushroom soup was great, really great, but I’m not certain lives up to the awesomeness exemplified in the Balthazar recipe I made last year.
And it’s funny, because if I had tried this first I would have loved it endlessly, but it happened the other way around and now it only gets second billing.
Woe is it.
The carrot-miso-ginger dressing is excellent, and I’ll make it again and also, if you have any uses for fresh miso, please let me know because I have a freaking lot of it leftover.
The hoisin riblets are utter riblet perfection.
Go, print out the recipe, laminate and frame it.
You can thank me, and by me, I mean Epicurious.com, later.
Just don’t try to cook for me.
I mean because seriously, nobody deserves that kind of punishment.
Today is my sister’s birthday.
Every year, I ask her what kind of cake I can make her and do you know what she says?
“I don’t want a cake.
I just want a big bowl of vanilla bean custard.” I hope you understand how hard this is for me (and please read that back in your brattiest little sister voice; it is, after all, all about me, right?) Making elaborate birthday cakes for family and friends is my thing.
It has launched an entire section of this site, and portion of my cookbook (which includes my son’s 2nd, my husband’s 37th and 38th, and maybe even your next birthday cakes, too).
I delight in trying to find a layered summary of everyone’s favorite things that fits in a cake carrier, and I think it’s awfully mean of my sister to deny me this outlet every August 30th.
(Huff.
Puff.) A bowl of custard?
There’s not much to say about it.
Or, there might not be if your narrator wasn’t such a blabbermouth.
To wit: Custard, or pastry cream, is a pretty big deal in my family.
My mother and sister especially consider it among the dessert greats, whereas others mostly look at it as just an element of grander things.
It’s the filling of cream puffs and eclairs; it forms a delightful layer underneath freshly sliced strawberries or an artful arrangement of stunning fruit.
Sometimes, it separates cake layers, fills the hollows of doughnuts and Boston Cream Pies, too.
But it rarely gets its own day in the sun — or you know, single serving bowl with a spoon — and my sister thinks that it should.
Custard, especially that which is flecked with the sweepings of a recently split vanilla bean, is really the ultimate vanilla pudding.
And I know, I know that I had a rant not so long ago on this site about how it irks me when people call pudding what I actually call custard (I consider puddings to be mainly cornstarch-thicken simplicities, not to bore you to death with semantics) but were you to on occasion serve custard the way you would pudding, I don’t think you’d regret it at all.
So this year, at last, my sister gets her way.
I made little bowls of vanilla bean custard and topped them with briefly roasted blueberries.
I know, I know, the blueberries weren’t requested but they’re really wonderful right now and their tartness, which is amplified slightly by a lemon juice finish, plays off the dense richness of the chilled custards underneath perfectly.
I just had to.
I couldn’t leave well enough alone.
I suspect she wouldn’t expect it any other way.
Sometimes I’m worried that I might be boring you guys.
Yes, yes, being plagued by feelings of dullness and inadequacy, how very tired of me.
But, let’s take some of the themes we have here; artichokes, beans, arugula, salad, bread and the most repetitive one of all: I ate something somewhere, and had to have it again ASAP so I tried to make it myself.
Today, we’ve got all of them bundled into one.
I try to say to myself, Deb, not everyone is infatuated by artichokes, arugula, beans and salads and every single way you can think of eating them either separately or together.
I try to rationalize, although it’s not my strong suit.
But then I imagine a world without people who get as excited as I do about artichokes!
arugula!
beans!
and it makes me terrifically sad.
Thus today I present to you: Artichoke, Cranberry Bean and Arugula Salad, or seriously the best thing I’ve gotten to eat twice in a week in way too long.
We went out to dinner at really-you-must-go-there Dressler in Williamsburg on Saturday night with our most newly-married friends.
Alex and Steve had leaden cocktails and I, well you know, I did that thing you do with your married female friends where you make sure they’ve ordered something with alcohol?
Or you’ll start with the irresponsible rumor-mongering?
Oh, I know this because it happens to me like every freaking day and people, there is always wine in my hand.
We’re all caught up now?
Onwards, then.
I wasn’t kidding the sixteen times I’ve mentioned in the past that I am a) obsessed with artichokes, b) that they are my favorite food on earth and c) that I will order pretty much anything on a menu that involves even a smidgen of them, thus when I saw that there was a salad comprised of an artichoke, cranberry beans and arugula, I briefly wondered if I could just order one for an appetizer and run off into the sunset with another.
I controlled my desires (mostly), difficult as it was.
The salad was dreamy, and I did my best not to moan audibly as I consumed, and seriously, why had I not thought of this before?
I fixed this last night.
It was just my luck, really, after I’d whimpered and cried last week over the immaculate beauty of the artichokes MattBites had photographed.
Why did my artichokes never, ever look like that?
Why must I live on the wrong coast to truly be their Number One Fan?
And then last night at the store, there they were, perfectly round and flawless, leafy orbs, looking especially pert after a 3,000+ mile trek.
Clearly, this was a sign.
Now, I know preparing artichokes can be a little intimidating, and this dish had the extra twist of trimming them into a bowl-shape, which I will try to make as simple as possible for you to try yourself.
Once you’ve gotten this done, and boiled them* for about a half-hour, you’re home free.
I used some fancy-schmancy Italian imported cranberry beans from a jar; their plumpness adds a terrific texture to this dish, but go ahead and use your bean of choice.
The dressing could not be simpler, as is it a thinned out version of the dipping sauce my mother always made when she cooked whole artichokes and my absolutely favorite flavor pairing with them.
Toss the beans with it and fill the artichoke cavity; toss the arugula with it and spread it about, and that’s it.
Dinner–with some cured meats, pickled vegetables and sliced baguette on a platter, and a glass of Gruner Veltliner, because, oh, why not–is served.
It’s the perfect light but indulgent 9:30 p.m.
answer to your earlier torture on the treadmill.
Unfortunately, it does nothing to offset the suckiness that Lost insists upon being these days, but it will make it easier to tolerate.
Really, we’re just skimming the surface of artichokes’ charms.
* If you are as easily amused as I am, this is definitely going to be the best part.
The artichoke hearts, you see, if you place them bowl-side down in the pot, bob around in the boiling water like those wind-up teeth at the dentist’s office, burping out little bits of water.
Minutes and minutes of entertainment, people.
Look, I have no business giving dating advice.
Or marital advice.
I didn’t, like, scope the scene or learn the rules or think big thoughts about what kind of person would be the right person for me when I walked into a bar 11 years ago and met this guy for a drink.
Nevertheless, if you were to try isolate a single trait essential in a life partnership, I think you should look for a person who is pro-whim — that is, encourages you to have whims and pursue them, for better or for worse.
Does that sound too abstract?
Okay, fine; let me propose instead the Strawberry Rhubarb Pie Bar Test, which should be enlisted as follows.
1.
Find a potential mate.
2.
Say, “Do I need to good reason to make strawberry-rhubarb pie bars?” 3.
If they answer, as mine did on Monday, “Nope.
I think they’re always welcome,” you’re probably on the right track.
If nothing else, your weekend is about to get tastier.
I’d been daydreaming about a late spring riff on an apple-crisp-in-the-pan bars since I got the One Bowl Baking book last fall.
I’m not sure I’ve ever met a pie-like cookie bar I didn’t like, but still, these made me nervous because they seemed so (ewww) wholesome.
There are more whole grains than white flour, less sugar and less butter than any other cookie bar I’ve ever made.
How could this be good?
Silly Deb, I should have just trusted the author implicitly.
Yvonne Ruperti is a former Cook’s Illustrated writer, America’s Test Kitchen on-air host and bakery owner, so you could say she knows a few things about baking.
But I love that she didn’t just go for the kind of perfectionism or obsessive, detail-oriented baking you’d expect from someone with her resume.
Instead, she wrote the kind of cookbook book that I imagine a lot of people would rather have on their shelves because it’s realistic about the way we really want to bake, that is, no multiple mixing bowls, no mise-en-place and questioning everything, i.e.
“Does this really taste worse if the ingredients aren’t sifted?” “So what if I don’t mix the wet ingredients separately?” I mean, don’t you wish every recipe writer would ask these questions before adding to your pile of dirty dishes?
And the recipes are for not just stand-bys (basic chocolate layer cake, snickerdoodles and creamy diner-style cheesecake) but clever innovations (hellooo, sweet and salty pretzel crunch cupcakes, we are going to be good friends) too.
These bars, though, they win.
They’re too easy and delicious not to make a habit of.
You dump your dry ingredients in your baking pan and pour melted butter over them and mix up the mixture until it crumbles.
You press most of it in to form a bottom crust, sprinkle diced fruit of your choice, a spoonful of sugar and lemon over it and sprinkle the remaining crumble on top.
It’s out of the oven in 35 minutes and, you know, I’d thought these would be ideal for a picnic or pot-luck dessert, or maybe for when it’s our turn to bring snacks into preschool.
But I can tell you as of 9:32 this morning that these are ideal breakfast bars, too, with a dollop of plain yogurt on top.
I first read about dukkah on 101 Cookbooks last week, and knew immediately that I had to make it as I am a bit of a spice fiend.
(Though not really an ouch-my-tongue spice fiend, but that for another discussion.) Sadly, I had few plans for what to do with it once I made it so it sat, uncovered (!) on the stove for a day or two until this kind woman named Erika directed me to a recipe for Chicken Dukkah on Chow.
Saved!
Now I didn’t even have to go out and research good uses for it.
Hooray for lazy!
I used Heidi’s suggested recipe from Dave DeWitt and Nancy Gerlach’s Spicy Food Lover’s Bible for my dukkah crust, but I understand that the combinations are endless.
I’d suggest looking through them until you find one with all the flavors you love.
Chow’s version of dukkah sounds even simpler and milder.
We skipped the skewers and having no idea what “chicken tenders” were, just sliced some boneless, skinless chicken thighs into three long strips each.
I am not a fan, not one bit, of the accompanying balsamic/honey reduction, and its smell reminded me all-too-poignantly of the cranberry port compote I made before Thanksgiving (and dumped, not a spoonful eaten, two weeks later), but I’m sure there are other, perhaps yogurt and garlic-based dipping sauces that could work better.
Or you could just eat them without a sauce, as we did.
They were very good, and it was great to have something interesting and new in the realm of, well, typically blah and uninspired chicken.
(Apologies, but the little cluckers are just not my favorite thing.) 
We had it over impromptu scallion-specked plain couscous and an Epicurious favorite, pan-browned brussel sprouts, though we had to use mini ones as my store was out of the regular ones “until Thursday” giving me a bit of a Soviet Safeway flashback.
This is a great brussel dish if you like nothing quivering or soft about your Brussels, they’ve got a good crunch and a deep, caramelized flavor.
Also?
Alex just called me a dukkah head.
I’m sorry, so sorry.
A little over a year ago, my mother and I leapt at the opportunity to make a whole lemon tart featured in the New York Times and ended up with one of the most caustic, inedible things I have yet to make on this site.
And people, with an ever-growing category of “disasters,” that is no small feat.
We received a lot of comments on that post ranging from sympathy to eye-rolling (as one of this woman’s recipes had previously felled another reader) but the bulk of them came in two veins: You should have used Meyer lemons and you really ought to make a Shaker Lemon Pie next.
As for the Meyer lemons, a milder and thinner-skinned cousin of the lemons we have readily available in the U.S., these comments made me dig my heels in, oh, just a little.
Because while Meyer lemons may have yielded a better outcome, this was not my complaint: my complaint had been that the recipe said that Meyer lemons were an option not a requirement and I held the recipe to this and it nearly cauterized a hole in the roof of my mouth.
But there was another reason that I knew that it would take more than Meyer lemons to save this tart, and that, my friends, is a simple matter of proportion.
The Evil Tart’s citrus to sugar ratio was eight whole lemons to three-quarters of a cup.
The standard Shaker Lemon Pie recipe uses two whole lemons to two cups of sugar.
You don’t need to be a math whiz to figure out why that all went to hell in a handbasket.
Isn’t it great how long I can stay–pardon the pun–bitter over a recipe?
Nevertheless, I digressed.
The disaster of last year’s lemon tart had me in no way less curious about making this Shaker Lemon Pie of which so many of you spoke, and yes, I was determined not to test fate and planned to make it only if I could find Meyer lemons.
Except, I never did.
Maybe I just missed the week they were at the store (they have a notoriously short season) or maybe I just went to the wrong stores, but the Meyers, they never showed up.
I even emailed South Texas Organics to ask when their Meyers would come in and do you know what they told me?
They’d come and gone weeks prior.
And then I sat home and cried and cried until, well, a small miracle came to pass.
A couple weeks ago, a reader in San Francisco sent me the sweetest note.
She said that this here smittenkitchen made her day (aww) and that she wanted to send me some Meyer lemons from her backyard trees as a thank you.
I am really, really not big on accepting free gifts, so I said no a couple times, and she insisted and then I tried to send her something from NYC as a thank you and she said no thank you and then I caved: I really wanted those lemons!
I am weak, but I am also lucky.
And so with no further derailments, I was finally onto my Shaker Lemon Pie.
What is this, you may be impatient to know 500+ words later?
The Shakers, a religious sect whose communal societies spread from Maine to Ohio in their mid-1800s heydey, were a notoriously thrifty bunch, not even wishing to part with the bitter lemon peels when they made a pie.
The pie that is their legacy uses paper-thin slices of whole lemons, macerates them in sugar for a good while and mixes them with eggs to form a most-amazing pie filling, part marmelade and part curd.
Though it requires some futsiness–I think a mandoline or the knife skills of a sushi chef are essential here–it really couldn’t be easier to make.
It is not for the feint-of-lemon heart, however.
This is only for those who like grown-up flavors like candied peels and lingering bitterness in their fruit, and I say this because even though I used a mandoline and the finest of Meyer lemons, I still think I should have shaved the lemons thinner to mellow the rings out a bit.
I think using Meyer lemons is essenetial for this recipe, but the good news is that you’ll only need two.
Nevertheless, whether you’re a lemon fanatic or have come into a supply of Meyers, if you aren’t sure you’re quite ready for this pie, I wanted to round up some of my other favorite lemon recipes on this site.
Turns out, we’re quite the lemon junkies around here.
Pre-rehab, of course.
Last week, because we are edgy, rebellious and pretty much the dictionary definition of renegades, we broke the law.
We decided we’d had enough of having an outdoor space and no fire-breathing apparatus to exercise our American-given right to burn food on in the summer months and brought home the tiniest, safest and most docile grill ever manufactured, basically the fluffy kitten of the barbecue landscape.
As I figure we’re going to be asked to remove it any moment now, all of my previous summer goals have be redirected to the following: enjoying every second of it while it lasts.
We are going to grill everything.
I am halfway to fulfilling my fantasy of setting all my food on fire.
We started with chicken, however, because in real life I am not exactly Francis Mallmann (I’m sorry to disappoint).
We had a small crowd for dinner last Thursday (in advance of this guy’s guitar recital) and because we are officially at a point when I find cooking anything extra, no matter how wiped out I am, still more appealing than finding a restaurant that can accommodate 6 grown-ups, a 6-year old and a 10.5 month old fireball.
I bet the restaurants thank us, too.
But if this is any indication of how simple summer cooking can be with a grill, I regret nothing.
This assemble-your-own dinner setup, which was inspired by one I saw in Goop a few years ago, is exactly as laid back as big dinners should always be.
First, you make a simple marinade for the chicken and let it sit in there for as long as you have — 20 minutes?
24 hours?
It’s all good, as Gwyneth would say.
Then you make an amount of tzatziki that will seem excessive, but it will disappear first.
You chop a bunch of lettuce, cucumbers, tomatoes and red onions and then you grill all of your chicken (even on my tiny grill in two batches, this took about 22 minutes), add some pitas at the end and that’s it.
You just fed 8 people and you barely broke a sweat.
Plus, you pulled off the unthinkable — a light summer dinner that allows everyone to eat or not eat what they don’t want (onions, if you’re my kid; bread, if you’re most people right now) and leave you out of it so you can instead clink ice in your rosé glass and enjoy the charred scent of summer wafting off the table.
Today I’m conquering some frequently unanswered frequently asked questions.* In short, no, my cookbook isn’t done yet.
“But Deb,” I’m sure you’re thinking, “How can it not be done yet?
Bloggers always finish their books in 6 to 9 months!
And didn’t you start it over a year ago?” At first I thought it was because I had grossly, dramatically and almost hilariously (but in that ha-ha-ow kind of way) underestimated the number of hours I’d need to work a week to get it done.
Then I blamed the toddler, depriving his elders of much needed sleep, leaving me bleary eyed and ineffective when I was supposed to be drafting my masterpiece.
But neither of them are as true of this: It’s the breakfast section.
I can’t put it to rest.
It started small and tidy, about 8 recipes.
But I kept adding to it.
I kept tweaking what was just fine to begin with.
It became an obsession.
I starting thinking about muffins while pushing swings at the playground, getting wound up about frittatas while lumbering back from yoga and jotting down notes about French toast while in places that were neither French nor toasty.
Ostensibly, I handed the breakfast batch into my editor January but Monday still found me still pulling pancakes out of the oven that I couldn’t bear not to include in the lineup.
It had to stop.
“No more!” I told myself in the same tone I use to keep the toddler from his curious habit of removing things from his dresser and putting them in mine.
(“A burp cloth where my pants should be?
You shouldn’t have!”) But it didn’t work (never does, really) as even yesterday I found myself making a list of breakfast recipes I’d add to the section if I hadn’t cut myself off.
This is one of them.
Last week, on a whim, I decided to make some coffee cake muffins for you.
And while none of went uneaten (they included butter and brown sugar, after all) I was just not feeling them.
They were too sweet and buttery, a predicament that can only exist during the breakfast meal.
They needed seasonal fruit and whole grain flour and real crumbs, not just sweet sandiness.
And so I fiddled and landed up something that’s been a delicious pause in a grim, rainy and otherwise bleak week — hearty but not heavy, studded with rhubarb and but not devoid of butter or sugar — it is not, after all, the muffin embodiment of an apology for an extra slice of pizza the night before.
And if you see an uptick in breakfast recipes around here in the next few months, I hope you’ll take it as a good sign, one that I’ve finally moved on from breakfast and into more urgent matters: slaws, layer cakes, seasonal pizzas, very cute meatballs and bourbon, i.e.
the other Smitten Kitchen Food Groups.
* The other FUFAQ is “Where should I eat when I come to New York City?” and I’m attempting to address that in a new page that will list some things I’ve found especially tasty around here lately.
And to answer your next question: yes, the croissants are that good.
I’m pretty sure I’m the last person in the cooking-obsessed world to get Sean Brock Fever, the chef behind McCrady’s, Husk, and Minero in Charleston.
Worse, this is probably a good time to admit that I was sent his first cookbook, Heritage, when it came out and rejected it on sight alone.
There was something about those sleeve tattoos cupping the sacred rainbow beans, an image I’ve seen variations on countless other farm-to-table cookbook covers and magazine spreads, that put me off.
Skimming the recipes didn’t always help.
Your red peas, cornmeal and gold rice should be from Anson Mills, and if not, at least the cornmeal should be fresh from a gristmill.
Your tomatoes should be home-canned, or at the very least, San Marzano.
Your pork should be from a heritage pig, your buttermilk and goat cheese should come from a local farm, as should your Red Bliss potatoes; this is your heritage after all.
And it’s not that I don’t share the book’s values, either.
Like most people, I prefer local humanely raised pork to the feedlot variety.
If you haven’t yet, I hope you get a chance to try freshly dug potatoes from a farmers market in a month or two, so you too can be amazed by the depth of flavor atypical of the grocery store variety.
I recently bought Anson Mills polenta and grits for the first time, and I’m converted.
They’re incredible.
They’re fantastically expensive too, as carefully grown food, the best in its class, often is.
My grandmother would roll over in her grave if she knew I had used two cups of them just to dredge buttermilk-soaked pork chops (you know, among other concerns there), as the cookbook suggests.
I unquestionably believe the world would be a better place if we all had access and the budget for these kinds of ingredients, or if we could all eat Brock’s amazing cooking — James Beard award-winning food that is exclusively indigenous to the South, using heirloom produce and heritage animal breeds — every night.
But when it crosses the threshold of my apartment, it’s hard not to be aggressively aware of its gap with the reality I live in, or, as Morrissey once sung to me from a poster on my high school bedroom wall, “it says nothing to me about my life.”
My central question in my daily home cooking is: will this work for me?
In my kitchen?
With my budget?
With the ingredients I have the patience to get on a 25-degree day on foot?
In my knee-high rubber boots and dirty winter coat that feels about one sneeze from popping a zipper, hardly the gauzy stuff of farm cookbook covers?
To me, the best recipes transcend their ingredients.
They make the humdrum ingredients most of us are compromising with in early March magical, not the other way around.
These are the recipe stories I hope this site tells.
And I’m here to say that if this dish is indicative of the rest of the book, you’re in for a treat.
I spied these pork chops early last week after spending 5-plus months having very little interest in meat or cooked vegetables and yet there I was, pining.
Panting.
Pawing at the book a little, to be honest.
It had to happen in my kitchen, and I’m so glad it did.
Last weekend, I baked three birthday cakes.
One of my mother’s oldest friends was turning 65, and when she mentioned that she was going to order the cake for her birthday party from a bakery, I had to object.
People, when I turn 65 someone better bake me a homemade cake, is all I am saying.
I think the very least someone deserves for hitting such a fine age with style is a friend, elbows-deep in flour, frosting and devotion.
So I volunteered myself, and I knew exactly what I wanted to make.
I had seen this utterly insane and therefore completely and totally awesome cake on Leite’s a couple months ago.
It involved all of the best things on earth: a pistachio layer cake, thin ribbons of jam, sheets of marzipan and bitter-chocolate ganache filling and coating.
It had marzipan flowers on top, with a trail of pistachios simulating leaves.
It was the prettiest things I have ever seen.
But as we got to discussing what would work for her party, we decided to go another route, one that would ensure there would be something for everyone, and in a move that everyone I know still considers utterly insane, I offered to bake three: one Hazelnut Brown Butter Cake (I doubled it, filled and coated it with ganache), one Tiramisu Cake and one Perfect Party Cake from Dorie Greenspan (don’t worry, I’ll get to this one soon).
What can I say?
I imagined three square cakes lined up on their stands, and the cuteness was almost too much to bear.
Astoundingly, we made it to the party on time with all three cakes intact–and even managed to score a parking space right in front of the Upper West Side apartment building, making for the easiest cake-delivery, ever.
But I forgot my camera, something I might kick myself for until the end of time.
[P.S.
The cakes were a hit!]
So why am I telling you about this today?
Because I couldn’t get the pistachio-marzipan-chocolate cake out of my mind.
And my birthday was last week.
And I wanted that cake, and that cake only.
I bided my time until Sunday, when we’d see our families for Father’s Day and SantaDad’s birthday, not to mention my mother (the ultimate marzipan fanatic).
And though the cake decorating session I commenced at 10:30 p.m.
on Saturday night was the grimiest, messiest, most gummed-counter one yet, I have to say: this puts last year’s birthday cake to shame.
Alisa Huntsman and Peter Wynne modeled this cake after European petits fours glacees, those pretty, tiny, complicated things composed of cake layers and jams, covered in fondant, marzipan, chocolate or glaze, always with a piped flower on top.
This is my kind of baking.
I loved how elaborate the cake was, such a welcome change from the generic layers plus butter cream readily available.
I can’t wait to see what else is in the book.
But really–because who are we kidding here–I can’t wait to try the leftover slice in the fridge tonight.
I’ve baked more fruit crisps in the last few years than I could count on both my hands and all of your toes.
And no matter which sweet thing has managed to find its way into my gaping maw between crisps, it’s damn near guaranteed that I’d have preferred that it had been some variety of baked fruit, in its countless incarnations.
There’s been an apple-fresh cranberry, apple-raisin, apple-pear, peach, peach-blueberry, peach-raspberry, mixed berry and one day, hopefully very soon, there will be a mango and also a sour cherry.
But before we get into my new favorite topping, let me give you a rough outline of the makings of any baked fruit crisp.
Fruit of your choice is washed, prepped and coarsely chopped and tossed in its baking dish (usually, a deep dish pie pan, but it can be scaled up easily to a 9×13) with somewhere between two tablespoons (for a not very leaky fruit) to half a cup of flour (berries, I’m looking at you), some sugar (more for rhubarb, way less for peaches), a pinch of salt and some flavoring, be it lemon juice, cinnamon or a scrape of vanilla.
Go wild.
The topping always begins with melted butter, because it’s the easiest and it has never failed me, a few tablespoons of brown, white or crunchy sugar, and a mixture of flour/oats/finely chopped nuts or just flour.
This mix is spread over the fruit mixture and popped in the oven for 40 to 60 minutes, while a resolution-weakening aroma wafts through your apartment.
There is simply nothing not to love.
But here’s where things were never quite ideal: You see, I’m a topping junkie, and one stick of butter’s worth never made quite enough.
Oh, sure, it covered well, but what I really wanted was a big bite topping with every bite of fruit.
Yet, uninterested in turning a healthful baked fruit dessert into something with the caloric heft of cheesecake, I refuse to double the topping to a two-stick of butter count.
Enter the darling Nigella Lawson.
In a pear-apple crumble recipe published in the New York Times a few years ago–which I’ve made, and is both understated and fantastic–she adds a teaspoon of baking powder to a somewhat standard crisp topping and turns it into a crumble, with large rubble-like pieces of awesome, without upping the butter in any way.
All this time, I thought I could love nothing more than a baked fruit crisp, and it took a single bite of a rhubarb-strawberry crumble at a Sunday afternoon barbeque to turn my back on the crisp, perhaps for good.
With a little leavening, the proportion of topping to fruit is closer to the gloried 1:2 ratio that makes you feel like you’re being “good,” just not earnestly so.
Personally, I can’t imagine wanting anything more from dessert.
It has been seven days since I told you about the fennel ice cream I made last week, and indicated that I would be telling you about what I was going to pair it with (actually, I said “pear” it with, because I can never resist the opportunity to make people roll their eyes) within a day or two.
And it’s been a week!
My nerviness knows no bounds!
How do you put up with this teasing?
Will there be mutiny on the smittenkitchen bounty?
It’s probably not going to help when I tell you the following:
Vanilla
Brown Butter
Pear
Crisp 
It’s also not going to help when I stop right here.
Because what else is there to say?
What words can I add to a dessert that could possible make it more appealing than Vanilla Brown Butter Pear Crisp?
Nothing, nada.
If you are swooning right now, you’d be correct.
If you’re not, well, you should be.
Or you would be, if you had tried it.
Or leftover in the days that followed, warmed up in the microwave with a scoop of melty fennel ice cream on top.
The almond kept the crispy “crispy.” The vanilla bean and brown butter made it extra-prosh.
The pears always wanted to be baked, anyway.
But really, I already told you everything you need to know:
Vanilla.
Brown Butter.
Pear.
Crisp.
My work here is done.
I am not proud of this, but I’m really just a one trick pony in the language department.
Sure, after four years of high school French and the shortest exchange program ever, I can get by in Paris and because of this, can occasionally make sense of written Italian or Spanish, but Czech?
German?
I couldn’t be further from makings heads or tails of it.
As you might expect, as Alex and I luckily found ourselves at some untouristy eateries in Vienna–without a waitstaff that catered to the language-deficient or menus reprinted in 16 world languages–quite a bit of Hilarity Ensued.
After many hours of walking on a hot day, Alex and I were beat, so we flopped down at a cafe and mindlessly asked for “iced coffees” completely forgetting that “ice” equals “eis” equals “ice cream” in German, and ended up with a big cup filled with coffee, cream, whipped cream and a scoop of vanilla gelato.
I wish all mistakes were this tasty!
Looking to offset the heavy dishes Central Europe, I also ordered something that I guessed was going to be a light, healthy vegetable strudel, something I’d imagined dreamily warm with crispy, flaky edges and something I was certainly going to want to repeat at home.
Unfortunately, I received a brick of rice with a few flecks of carrots and parnsips, wrapped in phyllo and smothered in a creamy herb sauce.
It all went very well with my eis Kaffee!
Nevertheless, this in no way diminished my dream to make my own vegetable strudel once I got home, so when I found a wild mushroom strudel recipe on Leite’s Culinaria, I was so eager to try it, I entirely forgot about my wholly justified Fear of Phyllo.
Here, just look at my first effort, doomed from the start.
I quickly realized that there was simply no way I was going to make this dish into the four burrito-shaped strudel the recipe suggested, and took matters into my own hands, dealing with phyllo the only way I am comfortable–in a technique I loosely adapted from Hogwash, or the very first time I saw a phyllo effort I thought I might actually be able to take part in.
Instead of stacking fragile sheet after sheet atop one another, you simply work with one at a time, folding into quarters and rolling your filling up into a little package, flag-style.
You end up with a neat little finger food, and, at least in my case, far fewer gray hairs at the end of the night.
(Alex’s too, as he heard me talking smack about the phyllo’s mother a lot less from the living room.)
Along with a big green salad, we ended up with a mighty delicious meal and I’m eager to make these again for a party sometime soon.
So, whose got some phyllo tips for me, should I ever get the nerve to try this again?
[Just add yogurt.]
And on Saturday, we returned from our week at sea, our week of no work, of sunshine and someone else making dinner and lo, what a bummer.
But we had a great time, from stunning views as we sailed out of New York Harbor on a freak 75 degree day in March:
On an epically proportioned boat
With the second-tiniest but most enthusiastic sailor (a baby two days younger had the audacity to steal Jacob’s Youngest Cruiser thunder)
To short excursions, an abundance of pool parties and endless plates of fresh fruit.
And then we came home and I battled a torte recipe with knives and rulers and whisks and the arced steel blade of a food processor and prevailed.
Because I am awesome, right?
But I’m convinced that the recipe had it out for me.
Well, the recipe and these still-wobbly sea legs, the feeling that the kitchen is sloshing along in choppy waters no longer charming on day two (and now three).
But mostly the recipe: I didn’t understand why it recipe demanded slivered almonds (which had been harder for me to find) if only to grind them in step one.
Two vanilla beans seems excessive considering that the vanilla taste was still muted — I’d use extract next time and save the expense.
A fussy orange peel syrup imparted virtually no orange vibe in the final frosting.
Steps seemed out of order (preparing a syrup first that you wouldn’t need for hours) and measurements were absent where I needed them.
Syrup is chilled just to be warmed again.
A simple adjustment shaved 30 minutes off the prep time of the frosting.
A sloshy orange “compote” seemed like something that would just dissolve a dry meringue, not complement it.
Parchment rectangles were sprayed with oil (is this necessarily?) which caused the rectangles to spread into puddles which merged together and slid off my trays; only significant trimming salvaged them.
And the baking time was easily double what was needed (good thing I watch the oven like a hawk).
And yet!
Despite all of those laments above, I’m spectacularly excited about serving this tonight because I’m pretty sure it’s going to taste like a giant Kit-Kat candy bar.
How could it not?
It’s gigantic rectangle comprised of stacked, thin, crunchy layers spread thickly and then coated completely with semisweet chocolate that hardened overnight into a candy-like shell.
It’s homemade from fantastic ingredients, it’s flour-free (thus kosher for Passover and gluten-free), dairy-free (paerve), practically fat free, can be made a day or two in advance and doesn’t require refrigeration.
Guys, this is like the Harvard of desserts.
But mostly it’s a giant Kit-Kat, which means that even schlubs like me get a piece.
